I thank you for the opportunity to discuss the changing financial landscape and offer my own perspectives on what the future might bring.
During the next few months, there will be significant debates on various aspects of financial modernization, both within and without the halls of Congress.
These debates may well set the stage for how financial service companies will operate as we enter the twenty-first century.
As we can all plainly see, the world is changing across many dimensions, posing new and ever increasing challenges for both financial services firms and their supervisors.
To succeed in this new world, I believe it is important for the industry and supervisors to find common ground for coping with these challenges.
By working together to find solutions, we can accomplish our goals, while retaining the core principles and values that have contributed to the industry’s success.
So today I would like to discuss briefly the changes underway affecting the financial services industry, as well as the individual and collective responses by the industry and supervisors to those changes.
Then lastly, I will offer some thoughts on what the role of an umbrella supervisor might look like in this changing environment for financial services.
All of these changes must be considered in the context of possible legislative reform.
The Changing World As widely noted, dramatic advances in information and telecommunication technologies have allowed banks to develop new and more customized products and services and deliver them over a broader geographic area with greater efficiency.
Such innovations by the banking industry, and by financial markets in general, have increased the sophistication and complexity of bank lending, investing, trading, and funding.
They have propelled growth in less traditional or newer banking activities such as investment banking, mutual fund management, insurance and securitization.
In the process, the risk profiles of many banking organizations have been altered in fundamental ways, placing greater pressure on management to monitor and manage underlying risks.
To meet this challenge, a growing number of institutions are employing modern financial theory for measuring and analyzing the trade-off between risk and returns.
The availability of dramatically more powerful computers at ever more affordable prices has allowed institutions to process vast data bases of rates, prices, defaults, and recoveries.
As a result, techniques for portfolio management and risk measurement that not long ago were possible only in theory are now becoming integral parts of daily operating practice.
By applying these theories and techniques, institutions today are more effectively pricing and hedging risk, allocating capital, evaluating risk-adjusted returns and identifying the optimum mix of financial products or services.
I believe these enhanced management practices have contributed importantly to the economic growth and market gains seen in recent years.
As competition has intensified, we have seen a growing overlap in the activities and product lines provided by both banks and other financial service providers that has diminished the past distinction between banks and many nonbank firms.
That trend has raised public policy questions regarding bank powers and the appropriate organizational structure through which banking organizations should gain new powers.
Proposals recently introduced in Congress to address those issues would fundamentally redefine the relationship of banks to other financial services companies and in some instances their relationship to commercial firms as well.
Banks have not only expanded their products and activities, but have also expanded their geographic reach, both domestically and globally.
Within the United States, banks have expanded nationwide as barriers to interstate banking have been removed.
This expansion should continue as banks exercise their new power to branch across state lines.
A related domestic trend is the rapid consolidation within and between banking organizations.
Although some consolidation is undoubtedly related to the removal of barriers to interstate branching, it is also spurred by improved technology, strong competition in banking markets, and the drive by banks to reduce costs.
Internationally, the globalization of banking has accelerated, driven by improved technology and the opening of economies in eastern Europe, Asia, Latin America, and other regions.
In particular, U.S. and other international financial institutions are forging a growing presence in lending, trading, and underwriting in these emerging markets.
These efforts have created closer links among the world’s financial markets and have improved the efficiency and availability of capital.
However, market integration has also increased the potential for systemic problems to transcend national borders, as the volume of international financial transactions has grown.
Last year, for example, an estimated $1.5 trillion of foreign exchange contracts were settled daily in New York City alone.
A default by a major U.S. or foreign participant in that market could disrupt financial markets worldwide.
Competitive pressures are intense to reduce the cost of financial services to the public.
This is occurring against the need to improve the financial strength and competitiveness of the banking industry from the levels at the beginning of this decade.
These factors have, in turn, also placed pressure on the banking agencies to remove unnecessary burdens on the industry without threatening safety and soundness.
Regulatory and Supervisory Responses to Change What have been the regulatory and supervisory responses to these changes?
Let me first discuss how we addressed the issue of regulatory burden.
Although the poor bank profitability of the 1980s and early 1990s was mostly related to industry asset quality problems, regulators and Congress alike recognized that improvements could be made in bank regulations and in supervisory processes to improve credit availability and bank competitiveness without sacrificing safety and soundness.
Both legislative and regulatory efforts undertaken in the decade of the 1990’s have simplified regulatory reporting requirements, expedited the application process, eliminated duplicate regulatory filings, and have led to more streamlined and uniform banking agency guidelines and regulations.
Taken individually, these and other refinements may not appear material, but taken as a whole they have put a meaningful dent in regulatory costs.
In fact, the industry on several occasions has reminded us that it is not necessarily any particular individual regulatory requirement that is problematic, but rather, their cumulative effect, much like the straw that broke the camel’s back.
We have taken that point to heart when considering new guidelines and regulations.
Efforts to reduce regulatory burden apply not only to banks, but to holding companies as well.
Earlier this year, for example, the Board streamlined Regulation Y and reduced application requirements.
These changes recognize that regulatory burden arises not only from the direct operational costs of compliance, but also from the indirect costs of delayed or lost opportunities to enter new activities.
To reduce impediments, the Board has decided that the application process should focus on the analysis of the effects of a specific proposal, and should not generally become a vehicle for comprehensively evaluating and addressing supervisory and compliance issues.
Rather, the latter can more effectively be addressed in the supervisory process.
The Board also recently completed a lengthy review of its policies and procedures for assessing the competitive implications of bank mergers and acquisitions.
Modifications have been made to that process to make it more efficient and address the potential benefits of scale economies for small bank mergers.
Another improvement in our regulations is the ability of well-capitalized, well-run companies to apply to acquire banks and nonbanks in a faster and more streamlined fashion and to commence nonbanking activities approved by regulation without obtaining prior approval.
To allow bank holding companies greater opportunities to innovate, the Board has also indicated that it will be pro-active in approving new activities.
Further efforts to provide flexibility and help modernize bank holding company regulation have been directed toward securities firms known as section 20 affiliates.
Last year the Board raised the Section 20 ineligible revenue limit on underwriting and dealing in securities from 10 to 25 percent.
This appears to be allowing greater flexibility for these operations.
The Board has also eliminated certain firewalls between banks and their securities affiliates and for other firewalls has proposed to eliminate or scale back even more, recognizing that other laws, regulations, and improved disclosures provide adequate protections against conflicts of interest.
These and other refinements should allow holding companies to move closer toward their goal of operating as a one-stop financial service firm for customers, while operating safely and soundly.
The Comptroller of the Currency has also taken steps to widen the breadth of activities undertaken by banking organizations.
For example, the expansion of insurance sales activities has opened new opportunities for national banks.
Beyond efforts to reduce burden and modernize banking powers, regulators are also redesigning their supervisory practices to address more effectively the changing nature of the industry.
These efforts are leading to a more risk-focused approach to supervision.
That approach is more responsive to the industry’s rapidly evolving activities and risk profiles and places emphasis on the institution’s own ongoing system for managing risk, rather than point-in-time transaction testing.
By focusing resources on the areas of highest risk, and eliminating unnecessary procedures, this approach is not only more effective, but also less intrusive and costly to all parties.
I should note, however, that successfully implementing this approach requires that supervisors attract, train, and retain qualified staff while also upgrading training, automation, and other resources.
This is a continuing challenge indeed!
Regulators are also trying to build on private sector initiatives that promote safety, soundness and systemic stability.
For example, at the height of Congressional concern about financial derivatives, the Group of Thirty sponsored a study to identify principles of sound practice for managing risks in derivatives for both dealers and end-users.
By providing guidance on this issue, that study served as a catalyst for industry participants to analyze and evaluate their own practices.
Subsequent guidance from the Federal Reserve and the Comptroller benefited from the insights provided by the study, while adding a supervisor’s perspective.
The study’s emphasis on education and sound practices spurred greater understanding and acceptance by the industry of supervisory recommendations for sound risk management systems.
I think it is safe to say that this cooperative approach between the private sector and regulators resulted in stronger industry practices and better supervisory oversight, not only for derivatives, but also for bank risk management more generally.
Together, the industry and agency response helped stave off potentially restrictive legislation.
Another example of how supervisors are trying to build on bank management practices is their use of internal value at risk models in the calculation of capital requirements for market risk.
By relying on internal models already used by the institutions for their trading and risk management activities, regulators can reduce burden while vastly improving the accuracy of the capital calculation.
In addition, by embracing internal models for regulatory purposes, supervisors are encouraging organizations to incorporate sophisticated risk models more fully and formally into their risk management systems and to continue to upgrade and improve the models.
As these two examples illustrate, supervisors recognize that they do not have all the answers and that rigid regulatory solutions may often do more harm than good.
A supervisory approach that promotes continued improvements in private sector practices provides the right incentives to industry and, in the case of banking, also reduces risks to the federal safety net.
In these ways, supervisors are placing greater reliance on a bank’s own risk management system as the first line of defense for ensuring safety and soundness.
We also want to rely more on market discipline as another line of defense.
This requires increased, improved disclosure of a bank’s activities, risk exposures, and philosophy for managing and controlling risk.
We have made significant gains for derivatives and market risks.
Hopefully we will see further gains in other areas in the years ahead.
While it is important for supervisors to identify risk at individual banks, as the central bank the Federal Reserve must also be watchful for conditions and trends external to the banking system that could place the financial system and the economy at risk.
This broader perspective has become especially important with the globalization of banking and integration of markets.
That is why the Federal Reserve has worked closely with financial regulators around the world to reduce systemic risk and promote sound banking practices and improved disclosures among both developed and emerging countries.
These efforts have led to the advancement by the BIS of core principles of bank supervision for authorities world-wide and, significantly, promotion of consolidated supervision of banking organizations by home country authorities.
The issue of consolidated supervision is particularly relevant in revisiting the question of the modernization of the banking system.
I will come to that in a moment.
Financial Modernization and Umbrella Supervision First I would like to point out that whether legislative agreement is reached or not, market forces will continue the modernization of the financial services industry and will further blur the lines between banks and nonbanks.
For example, we can expect mutual funds to refine their offerings to compete with bank checking and savings accounts, albeit without deposit insurance.
Banks will undoubtedly make further inroads in mutual fund management and investment banking through internal growth and through acquisitions of securities firms.
Investment banks may also supplement their services by making commercial loans and participating in loan syndications.
With such things happening, why do we need a legislative solution?
The answer is that a well thought out proposal addressing the appropriate structure for the industry would allow for a more rapid and efficient integration of financial services.
Moreover, by clearly defining the boundaries and structure of financial conglomerates, a well considered supervisory program could adequately protect banks without undue intrusion to other parts of the conglomerate.
Because financial conglomerates generally operate as integrated entities and manage risks on a global basis across business lines, their true operating structure superimposes a risk management and internal control process that extends across legal-entity-based corporate structures.
In this light, supervision by legal entity can create important supervisory gaps that may expose the insured depository institution to unnecessary risk.
That is to say, someone should look at the risk management of the organization as an organic whole, rather than as separate pieces that are simply added together.
In fact, comprehensive, consolidated supervision by the home country supervisor is a legal requirement for foreign banks operating in the U.S.
Some foreign supervisors are now beginning to question the consolidated supervision of U.S. firms operating in their countries.
Now, I suspect some nonbank firms may feel apprehension at having an umbrella supervisor evaluate their operations.
But let me emphasize that such oversight need not be overly onerous or intrusive.
In fact, regulators are probably better prepared than ever before to implement an umbrella supervisory approach as a result of the supervisory techniques and approaches I just discussed.
By applying risk-focused supervision, and promoting sound practices, and improved market disclosures, an umbrella supervisor should be able to implement an effective, unintrusive oversight process for conglomerates.
Moreover, an umbrella supervisor may be able to provide assurances and information to other regulators and individual supervisors which may minimize their need to extend their reviews beyond the legal supervised entity and into the conglomerate’s other operations, creating duplication and burden.
I believe that the umbrella supervisor, whether it is the central bank or another agency, should not attempt to duplicate efforts of other regulators.
Rather, the umbrella supervisor should evaluate the financial conglomerate from a more comprehensive perspective, bridging the gap between an organization’s legal structure and its structure for taking and managing risk.
Similarly, the umbrella supervisor need not attempt to extend bank-like safety and soundness regulations to nonbank entities.
Those standards were never intended to apply to the nonbank entities of a conglomerate and would insert unnecessary competitive barriers without achieving the desired benefits.
How exactly should an umbrella supervisor meet its responsibilities?
First by focusing its supervisory efforts on the adequacy of the risk management and internal control process of the parent company and of the group as a whole, and determining how well those systems protect the safety and soundness of affiliated banks.
That evaluation could be performed in a manner similar to that of a securities analyst, albeit from a different viewpoint.
This assessment might involve analysis of public financial statements, rating agencies and Wall Street analyst reports, internal management reports, internal and external audit reports, meetings with management, and only limited, if any, on-site inspections of nonbank affiliates.
Any visits that are made could be limited to testing the adequacy of management and operating systems, to protect the insured depository institution.
While various approaches could be taken to address capital adequacy and to avoid the unnecessary or inappropriate use of double leverage, I believe such approaches should be measured against the goal of assuring the safety and soundness of the affiliated banks.
And finally, the umbrella supervisor should have appropriate enforcement authority, including the authority to require the sale of the bank in extreme situations.
Conclusion It is clear that the financial services industry is changing and that banking powers must also change if banks are to remain competitive.
The Board has long supported reforms and strongly urges them today.
However, changes such as these carry risks.
It is important, therefore, that change be introduced properly through legislative debate and by adopting proper safeguards to ensure that nonbank activities do not unduly expose banks and taxpayers.
The Federal Reserve is mindful of regulatory burden and of the need to accommodate change.
Nevertheless, we also believe that some type of umbrella supervision will be necessary to protect insured depository institutions and address systemic risk concerns.

But I am learning quickly.
As a Federal Reserve Board member, and a member of the Board of the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation, I have taken the opportunity to visit with NHS organizations on several of my trips to Reserve Bank cities, and I can't help but be impressed with the incredible work NeighborWorks groups do with their banking and other partners.
Recently, in fact, I toured several NHS neighborhoods right here in New York, with a mixed group of NHS leaders, bankers and others.
I remember that as we traveled together on the bus, I was struck by how well the bankers and neighborhood residents worked together to solve problems and understood each others' perspectives and needs.
What impressed me most was the spirit of teamwork among the bankers and the neighborhood representatives and their genuine enthusiasm for the process and the projects we saw.
The partnership approach to community development is certainly alive and well, and its living and thriving in NeighborWorks organizations.
The NeighborWorks Model In fact, I admit that I sometimes refer to this partnership approach to community development as the NeighborWorks "formula," though that may be somewhat of a misnomer given the flexibility of the approach to adapt to different conditions in NeighborWorks neighborhoods throughout the country.
From the outside looking in, and viewing it in action, it appears on the surface to be a simple formula: involve neighborhood residents, nonprofit development groups and the public and private sectors in a multi-faceted program that attacks neighborhood problems on a comprehensive basis.
In short, the NeighborWorks model focuses on the overall economic health and well being of neighborhoods, not just on housing, and uses a sound, public/private partnership approach to attack neighborhood problems.
Yes, I guess that might look simple to the uninitiated.
But as everyone in this room knows and I've come to learn, it's an extraordinary process in which much can go wrong if NHS leadership and vision are missing, or if bankers are unwilling to take a closer look at lending opportunities in neighborhoods.
Campaign for Home Ownership There may be no better example of the NHS partnership model than the recently completed four-year National Campaign for Home Ownership in which NHS of New York, along with over 100 other NeighborWorks groups from around the country, participated.
The Campaign helped over 10,000 low- and moderate-income families become new homeowners through major partnerships with banks, thrifts, insurance companies, foundations and other private companies.
In doing so, the Campaign helped attract over $700 million in investment in economically distressed communities.
The NHS of New York should be extremely proud that it was the number two producer during the campaign, helping over 900 families to become homeowners.
Full-Cycle Lending These are really quite extraordinary accomplishments for the NetWork participants, and especially for NHS of New York.
At the person-to-person level, the campaign provided services that literally helped change the lives of families and the futures of neighborhoods.
At another level, the campaign was a clear demonstration of the wisdom and strength of the NHS partnership approach.
In this case, the formula is the NetWork's "Full-Cycle Lending" system.
Using the system, NHS organized the partnerships among bankers, public officials, residents and others at the local level.
It provided pre-purchase home buyer education that is so important in helping new home buyers to wade through the complexities of financing a real estate purchase.
The NHS also worked with lenders, insurers, secondary market participants and others to help create flexible loan products, and provided property inspection services.
And finally, the NHS continues to provide post-purchase counseling for the new home owners to help retain neighborhood stability and avoid delinquency and default.
Did I say that this was a simple model?
about as simple as, well... maybe macroeconomics.
Banking and the Future of Community Development My visits with NHS here and in other cities have given me an opportunity to see how the NHS model works under a variety of conditions.
And that has been invaluable in itself.
But it also gave me a chance to reflect on why the model works and how to keep it working in the future in the face of dramatic changes in government policy, the banking industry, and larger economic forces developing in the wider economy.
So as we think about your accomplishments, I want to share some thoughts with you concerning several challenges that I believe confront NeighborWorks and other community-based development organizations in keeping the model viable.
I think some of these issues confront the NeighborWorks Network as a whole, while others will be more of a challenge for bankers.
Why the NHS Model Works First...briefly... why I think the NHS model works.
I believe that the NHS model works because it's a true partnership based on respect for the considerable knowledge and experience of the partners.
Each of the partners involved in process is willing to work with the others and forgo some benefits that might be demanded in other situations.
The NHS partnership model works because it usually is able to take the long-term view of neighborhood revitalization, with a special interest in making the neighborhood viable for low- and moderate-income residents.
Although the model often utilizes public and private sector subsidies, it helps maximize the benefits of the subsidies.
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the partnership works because it is adaptable to different local conditions.
Adapting to Change Will the model continue to work in the future?
We all hope so.
Certainly the NHS model appears to be a good fit with current and emerging public policy.
Large federal programs as a response to community and neighborhood problems are probably a thing of the past.
Public policy now emphasizes decentralization; community development, as well as other programs now must reflect local solutions to local problems and private sector participation at the local level is imperative.
As the NHS model demonstrates, that policy makes a lot of sense.
But I think that we're all realists and recognize that the model must be capable of responding to a rapidly changing community development environment.
The adaptability of the model and NeighborWorks organizations will continue to be tested by the changes in the economy and public policy environment.
What are some of those changes?
There are many, but let me focus on a few that I believe significantly affect community development finance and the role banks and other financial institutions will continue to play in the process.
Changing Structure of Banking The first is the changing shape of banking and how that will affect bank participation in the kinds of programs supported by NeighborWorks organizations at the neighborhood level.
Clearly, there is a major restructuring of banking occurring in the United States.
Financial institutions are being allowed to offer a wider variety of financial products and services and the geographic restraints on depository institutions are finally falling away.
As a result, mergers and acquisitions are increasing and larger banking companies are moving interstate at a rapid pace.
Moreover, interstate branching will accelerate the movement toward standardization of loan products and use of standardized risk-based pricing models on a regional and national basis for many types of loans, including mortgage and small business credit.
So while public policy and community development continues to move in a decentralized direction, banking is becoming increasingly centralized.
In that kind of environment, what happens to bank participation in the community development process?
I believe that the challenge for bankers will be to remain committed to work with NeighborWorks groups to develop products and services responsive to the special needs of low- and moderate-income families.
Increasingly, that is being done with some new, fairly standardized products.
But in many cases, loan products will still have to be tailored to fit the unique conditions of individual neighborhoods.
I think bankers will be up to the task, especially if community-based organizations remain sensitive to bank needs in the new banking environment.
Need for Long-Term Approaches All of us recognize that successful community development requires the long-term view and long-term commitment.
But the changing structure of banking is also reinforcing a second challenge: how to maintain banking's long-term commitment to local community development in the face of changing bank ownership and the need to demonstrate short-term market gains.
Here in New York, in fact, many of the mutual savings institutions that were responsive to depositors were able to take the longer view and, along with larger money center banks, could support community development activity that was based on multi-year goals and programs.
With many of the mutuals gone, however, and competition heating up, bank management is under increasing pressure to show short-term success and profits.
As a result, many bank functions, including community development, are being given profitability goals and measures that reflect short-term needs to satisfy stockholders.
Community development departments are restructuring.
One concern is that the new profitability goals will force some institutions to focus more on the higher end of the low- and moderate-income market, while placing less emphasis on neighborhoods and solutions that include a wide mix of incomes.
Financial institutions must be able to take longer view and make longer term commitments if neighborhood revitalization is to be successful.
I believe that this will be a major challenge for banks and for NeighborWorks groups.
Post-lending Intervention Finally, let me mention another challenge that I believe is shared by bankers and NeighborWorks groups: the need to ensure that the performance of low/mod loan portfolios, whether those of a financial institution or an NHS's revolving loan fund, will be dependable.
While bankers and regulators recognize that many of these portfolios may not be as profitable as some conventional loan portfolios, it has been demonstrated across the country that they can be reasonably profitable, under certain conditions.
The major challenge in maintaining the performance of these portfolios is keeping delinquency and default at a fairly low and predictable level.
Most banks and community organizations try to reduce delinquency and default by working hard to create a good loan package on the front end, one that's affordable to the borrower and carries sufficient protection for the lender.
And I think that NeighborWorks groups have been at the forefront of the best practices in efforts to make good loans.
But many groups now recognize that what happens after the loan closing may be as important as good underwriting up front.
The new frontier in successful lending in low- and moderate-income communities just may be in post-purchase services, such as family budgeting, financial counseling, maintenance training and, perhaps, reduced-price maintenance services for low- and moderate-income borrowers.
These techniques have shown promise in helping reduce delinquencies and defaults to levels that help sustain the economic viability of loan portfolios.
How these services are provided and paid for, however, will continue to be a major challenge that I hope bankers and NeighborWorks groups will tackle together.
Conclusion No doubt these and other challenges lie ahead.
But based on what I've seen so far, I would have to conclude that these challenges do not appear insurmountable.
There is, after all, much success and momentum to build upon.
There is a formula that has worked and a flexibility that has allowed that formula to be tailored to local needs and situations.
There is also a sense of teamwork and an innovative set of partnerships that provide the strength to meet future challenges.
And most of all, there is the idealism, passion, and unrelenting efforts of those who run and support community development organizations like NHS of New York.
I especially hope that banks will continue to support the efforts of NeighborWorks and other community-based organizations to help finance affordable housing and neighborhood economic development.

