The conference has consistently been an interesting and constructive one.
I regret that I cannot attend in person.
As I have noted previously--and, indeed, as is evident to everyone who attends a conference like this--the global financial system has been evolving rapidly in recent years.
New technology has radically reduced the costs of borrowing and lending across traditional national borders, facilitating the development of new instruments and drawing in new players.
One result has been a massive increase in capital flows.
Information is transmitted instantaneously around the world, and huge shifts in the supply and demand for funds naturally follow.
This burgeoning global system has been demonstrated to be a highly efficient structure that has significantly facilitated cross-border trade in goods and services and, accordingly, has made a substantial contribution to standards of living worldwide.
Its efficiency exposes and punishes underlying economic weakness swiftly and decisively.
Regrettably, it also appears to have facilitated the transmission of financial disturbances far more effectively than ever before.
The crisis in Mexico several years ago was the first such episode associated with our new high-tech international financial system.
The current Asian crisis is the second.
We do not as yet fully understand the new system's dynamics.
We are learning fast, and need to update and modify our institutions and practices to reduce the risks inherent in the new regime.
This morning, I should like to offer an analysis of the origins and nature of the Asian crisis and of some implications for risk management--with respect both to systemic risk and to the risks facing individual financial firms.
Companies in Korea and many other Asian countries have become formidable world-class producers in a number of manufacturing sectors using advanced technologies, but in a number of cases--relying on government guarantees, explicit or implicit--they permitted leverage to rise to levels that could only be sustained with continued very rapid growth.
Growth, however, was destined to slow.
Asian economies to varying degrees over the last half century have tried to combine rapid growth with a much higher mix of government-directed production than has been evident in the essentially market-driven economies of the West.
Through government inducements, a number of select, more sophisticated manufacturing technologies borrowed from the advanced market economies were applied to these generally low-productivity and, hence, low-wage economies.2 Thus, for selected products, exports became competitive with those of the market economies.
This engendered rapid overall economic growth at a rate far exceeding that of economies at the cutting edge of technology, whose growth has been bound by hard-fought, but slow, accretions to knowledge.
There was, however, an upper limit defined by that cutting edge as to how far this specialized Asian economic regime could develop.
As the process broadened beyond a few select applications of advanced technologies, overall productivity continued to increase and the associated rise in the average real wage in these economies blunted somewhat the competitive advantage enjoyed initially.
Slackening of export growth was inevitable.
In addition, losses in competitiveness as a result of exchange rates that were pegged to the dollar, which has appreciated against the yen since early 1995, slowed aggregate economic growth somewhat, even before the current crisis developed.
For years, domestic savings and rapidly increasing capital inflows had been directed by governments into investments that banks were required to finance.
Lacking market signals that are required to shape productive investment, much of that investment was unprofitable.
So long as growth was vigorous, the adverse consequences of this type of non-market allocation of resources were masked.
Moreover, in the context of pegged exchange rates that were presumed to continue, if not indefinitely, at least beyond the term of the loan, banks and nonbanks were willing to take the risk to borrow dollars (unhedged) to obtain the dollar-denominated interest rates that were invariably lower than those available in domestic currency.
Western, especially American, investors diversified some of their huge capital gains of the 1990s into East Asian investments.
In hindsight, it is evident that those economies could not provide adequate profitable opportunities at reasonable risk to absorb such a surge in funds.
This surge, together with distortions caused by government planning, has resulted in a huge misallocation of resources.
With the inevitable slowdown, business losses and nonperforming bank loans surged.
Banks' capital eroded rapidly and, as a consequence, funding sources have dried up, as fears of defaults have risen dramatically.
In an environment of weak financial systems, lax supervisory regimes, and vague guarantees about depositor or creditor protections, bank runs have occurred in several countries and reached crisis proportions in Indonesia.
Uncertainty and retrenchment have escalated.
The state of confidence so necessary to the functioning of any economy has been torn asunder.
Vicious cycles of ever rising and reinforcing fears have become contagious.
Some exchange rates have fallen to levels that are understandable only in the context of a veritable collapse of confidence in the functioning of an economy.
It is clear, for example, that neither changes in the relative purchasing power of the Indonesian rupiah, nor the relevant interest rates, can explain the more than four-fifths decline in the rupiah relative to the U.S. dollar by early 1998.
The sharp exchange rate changes in East Asia in recent months, as similar instances elsewhere, do not appear to have resulted wholly from a measured judgment that fundamental forces have turned appreciably more adverse.
More likely, its root is a process that is neither measured nor rational, one based on a visceral, engulfing, fear.
The exchange rate changes appear the consequences, not of the accumulation of new knowledge of a deterioration in fundamentals, but of its opposite: the onset of uncertainties that destroy previous understandings of the way the world works.
That has induced massive disengagements of investors and declines in Asian currencies that have no tie to reality.
In all aspects of life, when confronted with uncertainty, people tend to withdraw.
A similar breakdown was also evident in Mexico three years ago, albeit to a somewhat lesser degree.
In late 1994, the government was rapidly losing reserves in a vain effort to support a currency that had come under attack when the authorities failed to act expeditiously and convincingly to contain a burgeoning current account deficit financed in large part by substantial short-term flows denominated in dollars.
These two recent crisis episodes have afforded us increasing insights into the dynamics of the evolving international financial system, though there is much we do not yet understand.
With the new more sophisticated financial markets punishing errant government policy behavior far more profoundly than in the past, vicious cycles are evidently emerging more often.
For once they are triggered, damage control is difficult.
Once the web of confidence, which supports the financial system, is breached, it is difficult to restore quickly.
The loss of confidence that one understands the dynamics of the systems with which we are engaged can trigger rapid and disruptive changes in the pattern of finance, which, in turn, feed back on exchange rates and asset prices.
Moreover, investor concerns that weaknesses revealed in one economy may be present in others that are similarly situated means that the loss of confidence can quickly spread to other countries.
At one point the economic system appears stable, the next it behaves as though a dam has reached a breaking point, and water (read, confidence) evacuates its reservoir.
The United States experienced such a sudden change with the decline in stock prices of more than 20 percent on October 19, 1987.
There is no credible scenario that can readily explain so abrupt a change in the fundamentals of long-term valuation on that one day.
Such market panic does not appear to reflect a simple continuum from the immediately previous period.
The abrupt onset of such implosions suggests the possibility that there is a marked dividing line for confidence.
When crossed, prices slip into free fall--perhaps overshooting the long-term equilibrium--before markets will stabilize.
But why do these events seem to erupt without some readily evident precursor?
Certainly, the more extended the risk-taking, or more generally, the lower the discount factors applied to future outcomes, the greater the proportion of current output (mainly capital goods) driven by perceived future needs.
Hence, under such conditions the more vulnerable are markets to a shock that abruptly triggers a revision in expectations of future needs and sets off a vicious cycle of contraction of financial and product markets.
Episodes of vicious cycles cannot be easily forecast, as our recent experience with Asia has demonstrated.
Certainly, there were indications that Thailand's large current account deficits were unsustainable.
Once the recent crisis was triggered in early July with Thailand's eventual forced abandonment of its exchange rate peg, it was apparently the lethal combination of pegged exchange rates, high leverage, weak banking and financial systems, and declining demand in Thailand and elsewhere that transformed a correction into a collapse.
Normally the presence of these factors would have produced a modest retrenchment, not the kind of discontinuous fall in confidence that leads to a vicious cycle of decline.
But with a significant part of short-term liabilities, bank and nonbank, denominated in dollars or other foreign currencies, unhedged, the initial pressure on domestic currencies was apparently too much to bear, leading to a sharp crack in the fixed exchange rate structure of many East Asian economies.
The belief that local currencies could, virtually without risk of loss, be converted into dollars at any time was shattered.
Investors, both domestic and foreign, endeavored en masse to convert to dollars, as confidence in the ability of the local economy to earn dollars to meet their fixed obligations diminished.
Local exchange rates fell against the dollar, inducing still further declines.
The weakening of growth also led to lowered profit expectations and contracting net capital inflows of dollars.
This was an abrupt change from the pronounced acceleration through 1996 and the first half of 1997.
The combination of continued strong demand for dollars to meet debt service obligations and the slowed new supply destabilized the previously fixed exchange rate regime.
This created a marked increase in uncertainty and retrenchment, further reducing capital inflows, still further weakening local currency exchange rates.
This vicious cycle will continue until either defaults or restructuring lowers debt service obligations, or the low local exchange rates finally induce a pickup in the supply of dollars.
These virulent episodes appear to be at the root of our most recent breakdowns in Mexico and Asia.
Their increased prevalence may, in fact, be a defining characteristic of the new high-tech international financial system.
We shall never be able to alter the human response to shocks of uncertainty and withdrawal; we can only endeavor to reduce the imbalances that exacerbate them.
As indicated earlier, I do not believe we are as yet sufficiently knowledgeable of the full complex dynamics of our increasingly developing high-tech financial system.
However, enough insights have been gleaned from the crises in Mexico and Asia (and previous experiences) to enable us to list a few of the critical tendencies toward disequilibrium and vicious cycles that have all, in times past, been factors in international and domestic economic disruptions, but that appear more stark in today's market.
Certainly in Korea, probably in Thailand and Indonesia, and possibly elsewhere, a high degree of leverage (the ratio of debt to equity) appears to be a place to start.
Exceptionally high leverage often is a symptom of excessive risk-taking that leaves financial systems and economies vulnerable to loss of confidence.
It is not easy to imagine the cumulative cascading of debt instruments seeking safety in a crisis when assets are heavily funded with equity.
The concern is particularly relevant to banks and many other financial intermediaries, whose assets typically are less liquid than their liabilities and so depend on confidence in the payment of liabilities for their continued viability.
Moreover, both financial and nonfinancial businesses can employ high leverage to mask inadequate underlying profitability and otherwise have inadequate capital cushions to match their volatile environments.
Excess leverage in nonfinancial business can create problems for lenders including their banks; these problems can, in turn, spread to other borrowers that rely on these lenders.
Fortunately, since lending by nonfinancial firms to other businesses is less prevalent than bank lending to other banks, direct contagion is less likely.
But the leverage of South Korea's chaebols, because of their size and the pervasive distress, has clearly been an important cause of bank problems with their systemic implications.
Banks, when confronted with a generally rising yield curve, have a tendency to incur interest rate or liquidity risk by lending long and funding short.
This exposes them to shocks, especially those institutions that have low capital-asset ratios.
When financial intermediaries, in addition, seek low-cost, unhedged, foreign currency funding, the dangers of depositor runs, following a fall in the domestic currency, escalate.
Banks play a crucial role in the financial market infrastructure.
When they are undercapitalized, have lax lending standards, and are subjected to weak supervision and regulation, they become a source of systemic risk both domestically and internationally.
Despite its importance for distributing savings to their most valued use, short-term interbank funding, especially cross border, may turn out to be the Achilles' heel of an international financial system that is subject to wide variations in financial confidence.
This phenomenon, which is all too common in our domestic experience, may be particularly dangerous in an international setting.
An important contributor to past crises has been moral hazard.
The expectation that monetary authorities or international financial institutions will come to the rescue of failing financial systems and unsound investments clearly has engendered a significant element of moral hazard and excessive risk-taking.
The dividing line between public and private liabilities, too often, becomes blurred.
Weak central banks also have been a contributor to crises.
To effectively support a stable currency, central banks need to be independent, meaning that their monetary policy decisions are not subject to the dictates of political authorities.
In East Asia, as in many other areas, the central bank was not in a position to resist political pressures focused on the short run.
In addition, recent adverse banking experiences have emphasized the problems that can arise if banks are almost the sole source of intermediation.
Their breakdown induces a sharp weakening in economic growth.
A wider range of nonbank institutions, including viable debt and equity markets, are important safeguards of economic activity when banking fails.
Finally, an effective competitive market system requires a rule of law that severely delimits government's arbitrary intrusion into commercial disputes.
Defaults and restructuring will not always be avoidable.
Indeed "creative destruction," as Joseph Schumpeter put it, is often an important element of renewal in a dynamic market economy.
But an efficient bankruptcy statute is required to aid in this process, including in the case of cross-border defaults.
* * * How should these critical tendencies toward disequilibrium and vicious cycles be addressed if the global economy is to limit the scope for disruptions in the future?
What does the prevalence of these elements say about systemic risk and about risk incurred by individual firms?
The management of systemic risk, of course, is beyond the scope of individual institutions.
While interest and currency risk-taking, excess leverage, and interbank funding represent decisions by individual firms, such decisions, as well as the weakness of financial systems, are all encouraged by the existence of a safety net.
In a domestic context, it is difficult to achieve financial balance without a regulatory structure that seeks to simulate the market incentives that would tend to control these financial elements if there were not broad safety nets.
It is even more difficult to achieve such a balance internationally among sovereign governments operating out of different cultures.
Thus, governments have developed a patchwork of arrangements and conventions governing the functioning of the international financial system.
I believe that what is being referred to as the architecture of the international financial system will need to be thoroughly reviewed and altered as necessary to fit the needs of the new global environment.
However, what we have in place today to respond to crises should be supported even as we work to improve those mechanisms and institutions.
As a consequence of the unwinding of market restrictions and regulations, and the rapid increase in technology, the international financial system has expanded at a pace far faster than either domestic GDP or cross-border trade.
To reduce the risk of systemic crises in such an environment, an enhanced regime of market incentives, involving greater sensitivity to market signals, more information to make those signals more robust, and broader securities markets--coupled with better supervision--is essential.
Obviously appropriate macropolicies, as ever, are assumed.
Nonetheless, it is reasonable to expect that despite endeavors at risk containment and prevention the system may fail in some instances, triggering vicious cycles and all the associated contagion for innocent bystanders.
A backup source of international financial support provided only with agreed conditions to address underlying problems, the task assigned to the IMF, can play an essential stabilizing role.
The availability of such support must be limited because its size cannot be expected to expand at the pace of the international financial system.
I doubt if there will be worldwide political support for that.
The policy conditionality, associated principally with IMF lending, which dictates economic and financial discipline and structural change, helps to mitigate some of the moral hazard concerns.
Such conditionality is also critical to the success of the overall stabilization effort.
Convincing a sovereign nation to alter destructive policies that impair its own performance and threaten contagion to its neighbors is best handled by an international financial institution, such as the IMF.
With respect to private financial institutions, risks that are incurred reflect fundamentally the institutions' attitude toward risk and their internal risk management procedures.
However, market discipline and official supervision and regulation, especially with respect to those financial institutions that are supported by the public safety net, provide some constraints on individual firms' behavior.
Elements of the recent crises in Mexico and Asia that I have pointed to suggest several aspects of risk management and supervisory practices that deserve to be highlighted.
In this rapidly expanding international financial system, the primary protection from adverse financial disturbances is effective counterparty surveillance and, hence, government regulation and supervision should seek to produce an environment in which counterparties can most effectively oversee the credit risks of potential transactions.
Here a major improvement in transparency, including both accounting and public disclosure, is essential.
To be sure, counterparties often exchange otherwise confidential information as a condition of a transaction.
But broader dissemination of detailed disclosures of governments, financial institutions, and firms is required if the risks inherent in our global financial structure are to be contained.
A market system can approach an appropriate equilibrium only if the signals to which individual market participants respond are accurate and adequate to the needs of the adjustment process.
Among the important signals are product and asset prices, interest rates, debt by maturity, detailed accounts of central banks, and private enterprises.
Blinded by faulty signals, a competitive free-market system cannot reach a firm balance except by chance.
In today's rapidly changing marketplace producers need sophisticated signals to hone production schedules and investment programs to respond to consumer demand.
One element of added transparency that ought to be considered is the need for more complete and more frequent information on bank lending and other risk exposures.
We must be sensitive to the costs of putting additional reporting burdens on financial institutions.
However, it might be for the benefit of those institutions themselves, as well as of the international financial community more generally, if the aggregate exposures of creditors and obligors--both on and off the balance sheet--were better understood.
Secondly, we have seen that assets that firms thought were of good quality and to some extent liquid turned out not to be so when the economic and financial environment changed abruptly.
Such miscalculations reflect, among other things, inadequate credit analysis, lack of adequate portfolio diversification, poor evaluation of collateral or lack of access to that collateral, or presumptions of official support that were not warranted, perhaps because the authorities did not have the resources to provide that support.
Lack of a cadre of loan officers who have experience in judging lending risk can produce debilitating losses even when lending is not directed by government inducement, or the need to support members of an associated group of companies.
Experienced bank supervision and regulation cannot fully substitute for poor lending procedures, but presumably it could encourage better practice.
Apparently even that has been lacking in many emerging economies.
Reliance on real estate for collateral has proven to be problematic.
Not only can real estate values fall sharply in certain adverse situations, but at the same time such collateral becomes highly illiquid.
Removal of legal impediments to more widespread forms of collateral and to prompt access to collateral would be helpful.
It is becoming increasingly evident that nonperforming loans should be dealt with expeditiously.
The expected values of the losses on these loans are, of course, a subtraction from capital.
But since these estimates are uncertain, they embody an additional risk premium that reduces the markets' best estimate of the size of effective equity capital even if capital is replenished.
It is, hence, far better to remove these dubious assets and their associated risk premium from bank balance sheets, and dispose of them separately, preferably promptly.
Use of internal models for risk analysis, and as the basis for regulatory capital charges, has become common so far as market risk is concerned.
While the limits of models, and the importance of the assumptions that must be made to put them to use, have been reasonably well understood, those issues have been brought into sharp focus by the Asian crisis.
For example, firms now appreciate more fully the importance of the tails of the probability distributions of the shocks and of the assumptions about the covariance of price changes.
The use of stress tests, which address the implications of extreme scenarios, has properly increased.
Use of models for credit analysis is less widespread, but some progress is being made on that score as well.
Over time, as credit risk analysis and risk management processes in general become more sophisticated, the framework for regulation and supervision, including the framework for capital charges, will need to adapt to, and take advantage of, evolving risk management practices.
* * * Eventually, the Asian economies now suffering from the current crisis will recover.
If the proper policies are pursued and there is support from the international community, the process of recovery can begin soon and the structural reforms necessary for more durable growth will be underway.

For a brief time in the Fed's history it used a policy-making rule based on monetary aggregates, and today many are suggesting that it use a rule based on the federal funds rate.
Other countries have used policy-making rules that are based on explicit inflation targets.
While at this moment the Fed is an institution where members vote on monetary policy using their own best judgment, the issues illustrated in discussing the question of rules are still interesting and controversial.
These issues are what I plan to talk about today.
There are several types of policy-making rules.
The simplest form is an unconditional rule, such as having the monetary authorities raise the money supply x percent per year, come what may.
An alternative approach would base a rule on some target objective, such as stable prices, and have monetary authorities reduce the inflation rate to some specified amount, however the authorities choose to do that.
An intermediate approach might be called a feedback rule.
Under this approach policy objectives, or targets, might be specified in the rule and the authorities would respond in a regular way to deviations between actual values and the target levels of these variables.
Rules could also vary in how binding they are.
At one extreme, they might be mandated by Congress, as would have been the case in a stable price bill introduced by Senator Connie Mack in the early 1990s (but never passed).
They might be self-imposed, as happened in the late 1970s, when the voting members of the Fed's open market committee agreed to follow a pre-specified rule based on monetary quantities.
In either case they might carry exceptions for special circumstances.
At the other extreme, they might be simple informal rules of thumb that guide some members in their votes on monetary policy.
There are a long set of pros and cons for rules in general.
On the con side, rules must inevitably oversimplify and one might think that monetary authorities could conduct policy better simply by using their own best judgment.
Moreover, there may be several competing monetary objectives - say, reducing inflation and smoothing exchange rates.
Rules based on one objective may be inconsistent with rules based on other objectives.
Or, rules may simply not work that well, or may work well in one set of circumstances but not another.
At the same time, there are also some powerful advantages to rules.
One is that central bank policy becomes clear, regular, and consistent.
Rules (like models) may help monetary authorities sort through a welter of conflicting statistics and provide good roadmaps.
Rules can give quantitative guidance, when authorities are aware in a general way of the need to tighten or ease, but do not know how much.
Rules can discipline central bank behavior, especially when the central bank may be facing political pressures.
Rules can be worked out in advance in ways likely to stabilize the economy, they can be tested historically, and they can incorporate complex lag patterns.
In general, they might be preferable to flying by the seat of one's pants, or indeed to flying blind.
History In the early days, before most countries had central banks, countries operated under the gold standard, which entailed its own set of rules.
The world supply of money was determined by the usable gold supply.
New gold discoveries would lead to monetary expansions in recipient countries, which would then experience rises in prices and output.
Contractions in the supply of usable gold would require contractions in prices and output.
If a country on its own over-inflated demand, say by fiscal policy, its demand would spill over to foreigners and its gold would flow out.
While the gold standard was in this sense self-regulating, it was not a perfect system.
Monetary policy was not set consciously in terms of the economic needs of the country, but by the world gold market.
The world gold stock would fluctuate in line with international discoveries, while the stock in particular countries reflected trade flows.
There was no automatic provision for money or liquidity to grow in line with the normal production levels in the economy.
John Taylor (1998)1 has shown that this regime was responsible for large fluctuations in real output, much less stability in real output than has been achieved in the post gold standard era.
In the gold standard period of 1890-1905, for example, the US economy suffered five major recessions.
The Federal Reserve started up just as the gold standard was shutting down.
While it took some years for Federal Reserve practices to evolve, over time it has become understood that the rate of growth in money or liquidity set by the Fed determines the normal long run inflation rate in the United States.
If inflation is too high, monetary growth can be cut back.
If there is unemployment, monetary growth can be expanded.
This has all been encapsulated in the Fed's motto that it should "lean against the wind."
An Unconditional Rule: CROG But how much should it lean against what type of wind?
Economists have debated this from the beginning.
The great conservative economist of the twentieth century, Milton Friedman, has long espoused an unconditional rule that would have the Fed simply allow the money supply to rise by about four percent a year, the rate Friedman determines would lead to approximate long run price stability.
The great liberal economist of the twentieth century, Paul Samuelson, has on the other hand argued that the Fed was given two eyes, one to watch the money supply and one to watch interest rates.
With these two eyes and presumably the rest of its head, Samuelson figures the Fed is able to set monetary policy magnitudes judgmentally, without any need for rules or rules of thumb.
The logic of the Friedman constant rate of growth (CROG) standard is that if the trend growth of real output is on the order of three percent per year, the trend growth of money of about four percent per year would permit for some low, and perhaps irreducible, inflation and also account for positive or negative trend changes in velocity.
Were there expansionary or contractionary fiscal shocks, interest rates would rise or fall to stabilize output.
As contrasted with the gold standard, overall liquidity would rise at a steady pace set to accommodate the normal growth in the economy, rather than an erratic pace set by worldwide gold discoveries.
At the same time, CROG too contains potential difficulties.
A first, pointed out by William Poole (1970),2 is that there could be shocks in the demand for money, related to technological or regulatory changes in the money creation system, foreign flows, or whatever.
The CROG system would be buffeted by these, much as the gold standard system was buffeted by disturbances from the gold market.
Moreover, as with the gold standard, there is no role in CROG for short term discretionary monetary actions.
Even with automatic monetary stabilizers, economic cycles, under either the gold standard or CROG, could be long cycles and there would be no way to shorten them.
This last issue brings up a key point of issue between those who became known as stabilization policy passivists, such as Friedman, and stabilization policy activists, such as Samuelson and Arthur Okun.
To the passivists it is a virtue that there is no role for discretionary policy actions -- they feel that activist policy is intrinsicially either too little or too late (or too much or too soon) -- and they are perfectly comfortable in forswearing its use.
Activists, on the other hand, might admit that certain historical policy mistakes had been made but still hold out the hope that discretionary actions could on balance stabilize the system.
Pragmatically, the ability of a policy strategy such as CROG to stabilize the economy depends on the stability of money velocity.
If velocity is stable, either constant (as the classical economists used to think) or slowly changing, keeping money growth on a smooth trend will keep overall GDP growth on a smooth trend.
If on the other hand, velocity is not stable, by definition CROG would imply big cycles in total output unrelated to money growth.
Figure 1 shows the actual path of velocity (M2 basis) over the 1959-97 period.
There are clear upswings and downswings.
Until 1990 these swings could be related to a measure of the opportunity cost of money (which still would not save a simple version of CROG), but since 1990 the movements in velocity cannot even be explained by movements in the opportunity cost of holding money.
These swings now make it very difficult to use of CROG as a rule of thumb for monetary policy.
A Target Rule: Inflation Targeting A different approach, used in a number of industrialized countries (Canada, the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Sweden, Australia, Finland, Spain, and Israel, to name a few) is known as inflation targeting.
Rather than have some monetary quantity under the control of the authorities advance x percent per year, the idea of inflation targeting is to move right to the ultimate goal of monetary policy, stable prices - overall price levels should grow no more than y percent per year.
Rather than having monetary authorities operate in terms of a simple rule, the authorities are simply told to get inflation down, one way or another.
In this sense, inflation targeting is a very different type of rule.
It gives very great discretion to the monetary authorities to pursue one objective, and no ability to pursue any other objective.
While inflation targeting would seem to force central banks to become very specific about their policies, in fact the actual inflation targeting strategies have been more flexible.
They have usually required the central bank to target between one and three percent inflation.
They have also been defined in terms of some version of the underlying rate of inflation - the overall inflation rate less food and energy prices, the impact of exchange rates, excise taxes, and perhaps other clearly exogenous prices.
Moreover, the real world inflation targets that have been instituted usually give the central bank an out, if this quarter it wants to worry about exchange rates, output gaps, or other economic goals (Ben Bernanke and Frederic Mishkin, (1997)).3 While not as loose as rules of thumb, nor have inflation targets been entirely rigid.
The advantages and disadvantages of inflation targeting are much as for those of the other policy rules.
On the one hand, central bank policy becomes more transparent and more logically related to what most people would say should be the underlying goal of central bank policy.
On the other hand, there is a great loss of central bank flexibility.
All central bank objectives apart from stabilizing prices are relegated to the background.
Moreover, in the event of adverse price shocks, which impart a negative correlation between price and output movements, inflation targeting may force the central bank into undesirable contractionary policies just when unemployment is rising, though the fact that the targets can be written in terms of underlying inflation mitigates this concern.
There are also timing questions.
Often inflation targets are adopted when countries' inflation rates are clearly too high.
In this event, should central banks be required (asked) to stabilize inflation gradually or abruptly?
If there are nonlinearities in the inflation process, output gaps would normally be less if the central bank were to try to reduce inflation more gradually.
A close relative to inflation targeting is nominal income targeting, suggested by Robert Hall and Greg Mankiw (1994).4 The main difference between inflation targeting and nominal income targeting is in the shocks.
If there are price shocks, nominal income will not change as much as inflation, and the central bank would be better off targeting nominal income than inflation directly.
On the other hand, if there are output productivity shocks, these shocks could alter nominal income and force the central bank to expand or contract even if inflation were on target.
In general it is difficult to tell whether price shocks or productivity shocks will be larger and more prevalent, and hence whether nominal income targeting will or will not improve on inflation targeting.
A Feedback Rule: Taylor's Rule An intermediate approach has been devised recently by John Taylor (1993).5 Taylor's rule has the monetary authorities manipulate a variable they can easily control, the federal funds rate, in response to deviations between actual and target values of objective variables.
These actual variables thus feed back onto policy.
Taylor works backwards by determining how the federal funds rate, a short term interest rate, should respond to inflation and output.
Using the funds rate directly eliminates the influence of shocks in the demand for money.
These now become details that only the trading desk has to worry about.
But working out the response patterns preserves the desirable stabilizing properties of a CROG rule.
The Taylor rule can be expressed in a simple formula PFR = r* + p + .5y + .5(p - p*) where PFR is the prescribed federal funds rate in nominal terms, the magnitude to be set by the monetary authorities.
The equilibrium funds rate in real terms is r* and the actual rate of inflation is p. The deviation of output from its long-term trend is y and desired inflation is p*.
While Taylor's rule is often expressed in terms of contemporaneous values of inflation and output, if there are lags in monetary policy, p and y could be forecast values, so that monetary policy could be made forward-looking.
Suppose that monetary authorities were close to policy-making bliss, with no actual or forecast output or inflation deviations.
Then the authorities would simply set the nominal funds rate at r* + p*, its desired long run value.
If there were an inflationary shock, the monetary authorities would raise the funds rate by 1.5 times the change in inflation (the derivative of PFR with respect to p).
This means that the real funds rate would rise as inflation rises, preserving the overall system stabilizing properties.
If on the other hand, there were a recession, either current or forecast, the implied negative value of y, or output gap, tells authorities to lower the funds rate.
The coefficient levels of .5 were inferred by Taylor from the properties of large simulation models of the time, though later research has shown that larger response coefficients would make the rule even more stabilizing (Andrew Levin, Volker Wieland, and John Williams, 1998).6 The adjustment coefficients already build stabilizing properties into the Taylor rule.
If inflation rises, the rule tells the Fed to raise the real federal funds rate.
If output falls, the rule tells the Fed to lower the real funds rate.
But there could be even more stability implicit in this rule than meets the eye, through the behavior of long term bond rates.
For any given funds rate, if output rises the spread between long term interest rates and the funds rate will rise and dampen output demand.
If output falls, the spread will fall and stimulate output demand.
So there are direct stabilizing properties built into the rule, and indirect properties through the behavior of long term bond markets.
While such a simple rule might seem woefully inadequate as a descriptor of complex, subtle monetary policy, it turns out to explain actual monetary behavior in recent years quite well.
Figure 2, taken from Taylor's 1998 paper, shows the plot of the actual funds rate over the 1987-1997 period.
Rule 1 uses the coefficients of .5 and .5; rule 2 doubles the output response coefficient (g in the Figure).
By historical standards, the 1987-97 decade was a good decade for the Federal Reserve, with only one recession and with gradually declining inflation rates.
The equation tracks the actual path of the federal funds rate over this era of relatively successful policy very well.
One could make the fit even closer by fitting equation 1) econometrically -- the fit becomes tighter and the estimated response coefficients rise.
While most actual voting members of the open market committee during these years would probably be horrified that their behavior could be captured in such a simple equation, it seems that it can be.
Taylor (1998) himself takes the reasoning further by going farther back in time, to eras when central bank policy was less successful.
He uses his rule to show that: In the 1960-63 period, the time of high unemployment, monetary policy was too tight.
In the 1965-79 period, the time of accelerating inflation, monetary policy was too easy.
In the 1981-85 period, the time of high unemployment, monetary policy again became too tight.
Many fans of Taylor's rule are reluctant to take the analysis this far.
First, there is a technical question -- Athanasios Orphanides (1997)7 shows that Taylor's clear results become much more muddled when the actual data that were available to policy-makers at the time are inserted into the rule.
Moreover, the Taylor rule presumes that monetary policy is independent in the sense that the Fed is free to vary the funds rate.
Since the United States was on fixed exchange rates in the early 1960s, monetary authorities would have been substantially less free to lower the funds rate, as Taylor's rule would have recommended.
Finally, there is a question of historical context.
If the Federal Reserve were confronting the overhang of fifteen years of accelerating inflation combined with very large anticipated budget deficits, as it was in the early 1980s, policy might be forgiven a modest overadjustment according to the Taylor rule.
But while there are problems with Taylor's historical analysis, the central conclusion of this analysis -- that monetary policy was far too easy most of the time (1965-79) and could have benefitted from a rule is certainly borne out by others (see Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler (1998)).8 Taylor's cautious implication is that sometime in the 1980s, well before Taylor wrote his path-breaking paper, monetary policy has gotten on track and has pretty much stayed on track since.
After all these years the Fed may finally be learning how to conduct monetary policy.
Uncertainties The previous paragraph sounds like a basketball announcer describing a player who has made his last thirty free throws.
No sooner are the words spoken than the player puts up two bricks.
Is the Fed really learning how to conduct monetary policy?
Perhaps.
But there are uncertainties all over the place, both about the Taylor rule and indeed about rules in general.
At the present time there are at least four main uncertainties about the Taylor rule.
The inflation objective.
The Taylor rule requires the monetary authority to get specific about price stability.
Exactly what index is the Fed trying to stabilize, at exactly what level?
Because there are well-known measurement problems with all price indeces, it is not necessary for the Fed to shoot for zero inflation, but the Fed does have to shoot for p*, and it certainly has to know whether actual or forecast inflation is above or below p*.
That is not so hard when the economy is clearly suffering from inflation by anybody's definition, but it can become tricky as inflation declines and approaches its goal.
The output objective.
Uncertainties are even worse as regards the output term.
Deviations of output from its trend are usually defined in terms of the so-called non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU).
If, for example, the actual unemployment rate is above NAIRU, there is an implied output gap and the Taylor rule tells the Fed to lower the funds rate.
As with the inflation term, the Fed must then know where NAIRU is, and know whether current or forecast unemployment implies a positive or negative output gap.
The unexpectedly quiescent behavior of inflation in the face of low unemployment in the late 1990s has led economists into major soul-searching about NAIRU.
Whereas earlier in the decade most economists would have pegged NAIRU at about six percent, now opinions and estimates range all over the map.
A recent Journal of Economic Perspectives (1997)9 symposium finds some economists who still believe in a stable NAIRU, some who believe in the concept of NAIRU but argue that its level changes, and some who think the whole concept is a snare and delusion.
While the notion of a time varying NAIRU is conceptually attractive, there is again a question about how much time varying NAIRU should do, with respect to what.
This NAIRU uncertainty then transfers over to output gap uncertainty.
For the Fed to lean against the wind of output gaps, it has to know what the output gaps are, and that too can become quite tricky as unemployment approaches its desired level.
The equilibrium funds rate.
Even if inflation and output are on target, the Fed still has to determine what value to use for r*, the equilibrium real federal funds rate.
An easy approach is to get that by the regression method - simply fit the Taylor rule and compute r* from the regression intercept.
The problem with this approach is that it is only descriptive - fitting the Taylor rule only estimates how previous policy-makers might have responded to inflation and unemployment.
To get to the normative concept of what the equilibrium real funds rate should be is harder.
One approach might be to use the rate on newly-introduced long term indexed bonds as a measure of the equilibrium real interest rate for an economy that saves roughly as much as that of the United States.
The saving clause is necessary because in most economies long-term equilibrium real interest rates depend on national saving rates.
Subtracting a stable price term structure premium then gives an estimate of r*.
There might be other ways of inferring r*, but however that is done, it must be done.
Lags.
A last problem in applying the Taylor rule is lags.
Since there are long (and perhaps variable) lags in the impact of monetary policy, monetary policy must in principle move well in advance of the inflation and output gaps.
These gaps then have to be forecast, and the forecast in principle must be for a period far enough ahead that monetary policy can act in a timely matter.
This is a strong requirement and one can get misleading policy prescriptions by not looking ahead far enough, as is shown by David Small (1996).10 So the Taylor rule generally describes monetary policy well in years when policy was relatively successful, and also generally describes how monetary policy may have gotten off track in years when policy was less successful.
It has desirable theoretical and stabilization properties.
It gives clear signals when output and inflation are far from their target values.
Yet it can still be very difficult to apply such a rule.
There are interpretation problems on all the relevant targets - desired inflation, desired output, and the desired equilibrium funds rate.
The rule may also have to be applied well in advance to be successful.
The rule gives guidance, but certainly not complete guidance.
Implications To return to the theme at the outset, there have been attempts to reduce monetary policy to formula - first in terms of unconditional rules involving monetary aggregates, then targeting rules involving inflation, and now in terms of response rules involving the federal funds rate.
There are advantages and disadvantages to each form of rule, with perhaps the net edge for the advantages being greatest for the Taylor rule.
The uncertainties implicit in using any rule of thumb, however well it might have performed in the past, are probably sufficient that policy-makers should retain their discretion.
There can also be periods when the Fed is pursuing multiple goals.
At the same time, the science of rule-building may have advanced to the point where monetary rules of thumb might play some useful role in the conduct of monetary policy.
Myriad short term uncertainties and special factors mean that rules still cannot deal with many ad hoc situations.
But in view of the deeper uncertainties about how hard monetary authorities should lean against what wind, rules of thumb might give good guidance to policy-makers.
They might help authorities avoid large and persistent mistakes.
Rather than replacing judgment, in the end rules may aid judgment.
Footnotes Note.
I have benefitted from the comments of Joseph Coyne, Roger Ferguson, Robert Frank, Donald Kohn, David Lindsey, Laurence Meyer, Athanasios Orphanides, Susan Phillips, Alice Rivlin, David Small, and Volker Wieland.
1 John Taylor, "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules" (Stanford University, 1998).
2 William Poole, "Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy Instruments in a Simple Stochastic Macro Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
84 (May 1970), pp.
197-216.
3 Ben S. Bernanke and Frederic S. Mishkin, "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy?"
Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
11 (Spring 1997), pp.
97-116.
4 Robert E. Hall and N. Gregory Mankiw, "Nominal Income Targeting," in N. Gregory Mankiw, ed., Monetary Policy (University of Chicago Press, 1994), pp.
71-94.
5 John Taylor, "Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
39 (December 1993), pp.
195-214.
6 Andrew Levin, Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams, "Robustness of Simple Monetary Policy Rules Under Model Uncertainty" (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1997).
7 Athanasios Orphanides, "Monetary Policy Rules Based on Real-Time Data" (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1997).
8 Richard Clarida, Jordi Gali, and Mark Gertler, "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory" (New York University, 1998).
9 "The Natural Rate of Unemployment," Symposium, in Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.

