I want to spend my time with you today reviewing how some of the more dramatic changes in the retail banking milieu might be affecting the traditional relationships between banks and their communities, and especially those communities in which reinvestment and fair lending are important concerns.
The evolving banking structure, regulatory reform, and innovation in business processes driven by improved technology and intense market competition have combined to transform consumer finance and, indeed, the American economy.
At no time in our history has credit been more available and more affordable to virtually all income groups, than it is today.
The Community Reinvestment Act has contributed to this increase in the availability and affordability of credit.
At a minimum, CRA has helped spur the development of new tools and techniques to help serve credit needs that in the past banks were either unable or unwilling to serve.
At its best, CRA also has stimulated competition for loans and banking services in low- and moderate-income communities, leading many institutions on a continuing search for techniques to help better understand and mitigate consumer lending risks.
Two-Edged Sword But the pace of change in recent years has been dizzying, not only for consumers, but for lenders and your institutions, and the notion of reinvestment responsibilities for financial institutions may have become somewhat muddled.
Banking organizations face unprecedented challenges in the midst of intensifying competition from other banks and nonbank lenders.
It is a daily challenge to just keep up with new competitors, new credit products, technological breakthroughs, and an increasingly sophisticated customer base.
For some of you, it may be a challenge to just keep up with your bank's name.
Add to the mix pressures created by the need to explore alternative delivery systems, such as internet banking, and the year 2000 problem, and it might appear that just keeping up, let alone, actually growing your businesses, is your main job.
If all this is of concern to you, it is not surprising that virtually all of these changes are viewed by many consumers and the communities you work in as, at least, threatening, if not downright frightening.
While many consumers appreciate the additional services and increased convenience created by many of these changes in retail banking, and are willing to pay for them, others have deep concerns about the direction of consumer finance, generally, and banking in particular.
Clearly, both the substance and the pace of change are like the proverbial two-edged sword.
At the same time they are creating new problems and public concerns, they are also stimulating fantastic new business opportunities.
Today I want to look briefly at three broad changes affecting consumer banking that reflect both sides of this two-edged sword.
These are: (1) consolidation of the consumer credit industry that is creating mammoth regional and nationwide banking organizations; (2) the evolving regulatory framework which is providing increased flexibility and access to new products and markets; and (3) new business processes that have been made possible by innovative uses of new technologies.
In each case, these changes can create both new problems and, I believe, also new opportunities for banks in helping meet their community credit needs.
Financial Institution Consolidation Let me begin with the quickening pace of bank consolidation, which is being driven not only by a desire to obtain market power, but the need to become more efficient.
The potential benefits of consolidation are well known.
It often can help reduce costs, expand the range of products available to consumers, improve productivity, and facilitate economies of scale that enable banks to provide more services at reasonable prices, while reducing risk by adding geographic diversity to portfolios .
Consolidation, especially across the artificial geographic boundaries created by the old public policy, has vastly improved convenience for millions of consumers.
But it also continues to raise a number of concerns among consumers and public policymakers.
They are concerned that mergers can reduce the availability of financial services, especially in low- and moderate-income areas, where banking offices may be closed and hours of operation may be reduced.
They are concerned that consolidation in the industry could reduce competition and result in higher prices overall for credit and credit-related services.
They are concerned that large regional or national financial institutions may cause the transfer of decision-making authority out of their communities, resulting in reduced willingness by the acquiring institution to respond to particular community needs.
They perceive that the evolution of the financial services industry, now well underway, may threaten CRA's effectiveness and reduce the availability of credit and credit-related services for low- and moderate-income persons and areas.
And they are concerned that mergers can have a negative impact in local economies through layoffs at merged institutions and reduced overall corporate support for community programs.
While there may be cases where such perceptions have become reality, we also need to recognize that consolidation is also creating many advantages and opportunities that can benefit banks and their lower-income communities.
First, under the right circumstances, larger, highly diversified retail institutions can facilitate more effective partnerships at the local level, and may feel the need to work more closely with local groups than did the predecessor bank.
Acquiring institutions that are moving into a new market may have to rely more heavily on expertise of local officials and community-based development groups to maintain effective reinvestment programs.
So in many cases, I think mergers can provide a built-in incentive to reinvigorate dialogue between affected banking organizations and communities.
There is a caution here, however.
While mergers may provide some built-in incentives for bank-community group cooperation, that cooperation needs to be grounded in substantive working partnerships that make a difference, not just in writing a check and walking away.
It is critical that the larger, more diversified banking organizations that are emerging continue to work on the front lines of neighborhood revitalization alongside community-based organizations.
Another possible opportunity flowing from mergers is that they often can bring greater resources to the local reinvestment process.
Larger institutions, with their greater diversity of products and services, increased capital, and often considerable community and economic development experience and expertise, may be much more effective partners in reinvestment programs than their predecessor institutions in a community.
And larger institutions, especially those that operate in multiple geographic markets or regions can take best practices, products, and services to the regional or even national level.
Still, more resources that are not well adapted to local needs, just won't get the job done.
Those resources need to be deployed with sensitivity to local conditions if banks and their communities are to fully benefit.
In that regard, I think that both bankers and regulators may need to bring new energy to the whole issue of evaluating the effectiveness of CRA-related lending programs.
While CRA may be helping stimulate the flow of loan dollars from banks in the form of standardized products, it does not guarantee their effectiveness in helping address community or neighborhood needs.
Turning to another type of opportunity, it is also important to consider that mergers often help create healthier institutions that are more able to meet consumer needs and provide more effective competition for nonbank lenders.
In the long run, this may be of great benefit to local communities.
To the extent that consolidation continues to make banks healthy competitors for deposits and, especially loans, it helps keep financial activity flowing through institutions that have CRA responsibilities.
Finally, mergers may be helping strengthen support for regional and national community development intermediaries as one proven way to work in local markets.
These intermediaries, such as the Local Initiatives Support Corporation, the Enterprise Foundation, or the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation, bring value-added services to the community development process.
They provide low cost seed and gap financing, community development project packaging services and technical assistance to local community-based organizations.
Both larger financial institutions and local community-based organizations are generally comfortable with such intermediaries.
One concern, here, however, is that larger financial institutions could be led to believe that all they have to do is write a check to these national intermediaries and then sit back and let them do the work.
As a stand-along strategy, that would be a mistake.
It would ignore the hundreds of local community development groups who do not have access to help from these national intermediaries, but have proven quite effective when working with the banking community at the local level.
Deregulation and New Bank Powers A second set of problems and opportunities in community reinvestment seems to stem from concerns about the general trend toward deregulation and new powers for banks that enable them to enter new financial service businesses.
There is a general public concern that as deregulation, and efforts to reduce regulatory burden on financial institutions, proceed, banking organizations will simply pay less attention to community credit needs and reinvestment opportunities.
Geographic deregulation, for example, has caused concerns about the loss of community perspective and influence in bank decision-making.
Product deregulation and new bank powers, such as the ability to sell insurance, operate discount brokerage businesses, or underwrite certain securities, are sometimes seen as deflecting resources from CRA efforts.
Banks will simply move capital and manpower to these new lines of business that appear to demonstrate greater profit potential than does providing small loans in local communities.
Of course, a corollary to that proposition is that bank regulators are more concerned about reducing regulatory burden than in ensuring that legislative intent is carried out.
On that point I can assure you that this is not the case.
But I think it is important to see deregulation in quite another light.
It can also provide a host of new opportunities for banks to serve their communities.
For example, geographic deregulation is providing many of the same advantages I touched on a moment ago in the discussion of consolidation.
It provides banks with potentially larger markets and greater economies of scale for products targeted to low- and moderate-income areas, and ultimately enables banks to offer more affordable pricing.
As in all types of lending, the geographic diversity of a bank's loan portfolio, including its affordable housing and community development loans, provides an extra layer of risk mitigation.
On the product side, deregulation can increase breadth of tools available to provide value-added services for low and moderate-income areas.
For example, the authority to underwrite municipal revenue bonds could help provide long-term, low cost financing for both small and larger communities and provides greater competition.
New insurance powers may enable banking companies to offer property insurance in ways that could provide greater competition and improved availability and pricing in low- and moderate-income areas.
Helping ensure the availability of property insurance also can help protect bank loans and investments in those same areas, and help promote neighborhood economic stability.
New Business Processes Industry consolidation, deregulation and expanded use of new technologies have helped financial service providers develop and use new business processes.
This third major change in the banking environment, may be the most salient of all in its potential effects on low- and moderate-income consumers.
Clearly, many of these new business processes, such as credit scoring and automated underwriting, reflect a mass-market approach to lending that has greatly increased efficiency in making consumer and small business loans.
But these new business processes have also raised a number of issues.
There are concerns, for example, that automated underwriting and credit scoring foster a "one-size-fits-all" approach to lending that is inappropriate in lower-income communities.
Community development groups have raised concerns that use of such systems makes it more difficult for lenders to experiment with new, or more flexible underwriting standards that may not fit computerized models.
This, they fear, could reduce use of creative approaches in community lending.
They are also concerned that such practices may force applicants who might be viewed as creditworthy by a more personalized system into higher-priced "B" or "C" quality lending programs.
Finally, if these techniques are not used properly, they could result in disparate impact discrimination.
The opportunities here, however, are quite clear.
Credit scoring and automated underwriting have, in fact, been major factors in expanding access to credit for low- and moderate-income households and communities.
When used properly, they enable banks to reduce costs and manage risks associated with small dollar loans.
These new technologies and business processes allow banks to engage in sophisticated risk-based pricing while helping to reduce costs.
One quite interesting development is use of these technologies by banks to develop and market new credit programs that are specifically targeted toward low- and moderate-income consumers.
New mortgage products, for example, that employ low or no down payments and up to 100 percent loan-to-value ratios are made possible by credit scoring and automated underwriting.
And many of the products have received secondary market acceptance.
These new technologies also have significantly expanded consumer access to credit cards and are being used by many lenders to underwrite small business loans based on the creditworthiness of the business owner.
New technologies also present new opportunities to help meet the need for depository services for low- and moderate-income households on a more cost effective basis.
Advances in ATM technology, debit cards, electronic benefits transfer programs, wider use of direct, electronic deposit of paychecks and, perhaps, development of a broader market for smart cards, hold the promise of vast improvements in both convenience for consumers and cost efficiencies for bankers.
One promising concept, now being explored by a few institutions, with the help of technology, is the idea of "individual development accounts," or IDAs for short.
IDAs are a form of automatic savings account for low- and moderate-income persons, for which a match is provided, usually by a nonprofit organization or government entity.
Their purpose is to help lower-income families build assets in the same way that many consumers use 401(k) plans.
Under most IDA concepts, as consumers maintain a savings rate over time, the match is guaranteed and the funds can be withdrawn for an agreed upon purpose, such as a down payment for a home mortgage, or to help capitalize a microenterprise.
Usually IDA programs incorporate direct deposit systems and some nonprofit groups and banks are exploring the use of electronic benefits transfer systems to help create IDA programs for benefits recipients.
To the extent that technology can help make these types of small accounts more cost effective, they could be an excellent tool to help build assets of lower-income consumers and communities.
Ultimately, they could result in more community lending.
Conclusion This has been just a brief overview of some of the community reinvestment opportunities being fostered by the changing shape of banking.
While there is every expectation that the evolution of financial services will continue to be driven by the market, it is also likely that public policy, including policy governing what a modernized banking system will look like, will color your perception of the marketplace.
But as we all know, these changes -- bank consolidation, deregulation and new business processes -- are creating new tensions in bank/community relationships.
Many of these tensions are finding their way into CRA protests and political debate about the best way to modernize our banking system.
I would conclude, however, that although the evolution of consumer financial services is much like a two-edged sword, creating both problems and opportunities, there's no need for you to fall on it.

My personal association with NYU goes back a long way.
As a small child in the 1930s, I was an NYU faculty brat.
My association with Dean Boufford does not go back so far, but I got to know her when she served in the Department of Health and Human Services in Washington.
She did a wonderful job there and I know she is doing great things here at the Wagner School.
Graduations are always good moments in life.
They give everyone at least a brief sense of completion -- faculty and administrators, as well as graduates.
All those seemingly endless projects, reports, papers, exams and theses did finally get done.
They were handed in, read and graded.
And you are actually here getting a degree.
Furthermore, your parents and spouses and children and friends are suddenly all very proud of you -- all at the same time.
They've forgotten how they fussed at you for working so hard.
They've forgotten all those skeptical questions.
You're getting a masters degree in what?
Why aren't you going to medical school or to law school?
Why aren't you going to business school so you can get a job on Wall Street and make a lot of money?
Now they are all just proud of you and glad you got it done, whatever it was.
But I have a special reason to be pleased.
I am delighted that this talented, diverse group of people has chosen public service.
That means you share my deep conviction that public service matters.
It matters that we run our governments well -- efficiently, effectively, responsively -- at all levels.
It matters that we make the best possible public decisions.
This is not a question of ideology, of left or right or center.
It's independent of whether you believe in a big government or a smaller one.
The fact that you devoted your time and energy to prepare for public service means you care about good government -- government that functions well and does what people want it to do.
Moreover, even if you are not going directly into a public service job, your presence here indicates that you share my conviction that people in leadership positions in all parts of our society -- in the private, nonprofit, and public sectors -- need to understand public issues and participate as knowledgeably as possible in public decisions.
During your careers, many of you will go back and forth between the public and private sectors and between different levels of government.
The skills, knowledge, analytical tools and the ways of approaching problems that you learned here at NYU will be just as useful wherever you are.
I'm especially proud of you for having chosen to study public service in the 1990s, when so many Americans seem confused and conflicted about government.
Anti-government rhetoric gets shriller in each election.
Candidates who have spent their whole careers in elected office seem to think they can only get reelected by bashing government.
I find it quite distressing, but they do get audience response.
They say vague things -- government is too big, meddles too much, taxes too much, is full of incompetent or malevolent bureaucrats that never get things done -- and the audience cheers.
But if they say they want to cut Medicare, drug treatment, social security, police protection, parks, daycare, or schools, the cheering stops and the room empties.
Apparently a lot of Americans want public services -- indeed, they want more responses and quicker -- they just don't like government in the abstract.
Many of you will remember about two and a half years ago, when the budget negotiations between the President and the Congress reached an impasse, the money ran out, and the Federal government actually shut down.
In the first day or so, there was a lot of political rhetoric about how the government would shut down and no one would notice.
The anti-government orators pictured paper shuffling bureaucrats quietly disappearing without a trace.
I was Director of the Office of Management and Budget at that time.
OMB was then trying desperately to figure out how to comply with the shutdown law without causing too much damage, suffering and future cost.
Congresses had said that "essential services" were exempt, but who and what was "essential"?
Clearly the military had to stay at their posts.
Air traffic controllers had to be there.
No one wanted to throw open the gates of federal prisons, so prison employees had to stay on the job.
No one wanted to open the borders to illegal immigrants, hazardous drugs and other smuggling, so customs and immigration workers had to keep on working.
People had to get medical services.
Social security checks were specifically exempted by Congress; but what about veterans checks?
What about meat inspectors?
It was hard to find "non-essentials."
One of the minor decisions I had to make was whether to turn off the national Christmas tree, which stood behind the White House on National Park Service land.
The tree obviously wasn't "essential," so we were about to turn it off when the local electric utility said they'd donate the power and some other citizens chipped in to pay security guards.
No one wanted the lights to go out.
But the anti-government folks seriously misread the public.
As people discovered they couldn't visit a national park, couldn't travel abroad because they couldn't get their passport renewed, couldn't close on their new house because the FHA or VA mortgage approval couldn't be processed, and couldn't get next semester's student loan approved, politicians began hearing the anger.
The government reopened, and even the most government-bashing politicians said, "Let's resolve never, never to do that again."
It was an expensive national reality check.
Ambivalence about government is very American and probably basically healthy.
It was less evident, however, when I was starting into a public policy career, at what was perhaps the high point of American faith in government.
Like many of you, I always wanted to be involved in politics and policy to try to make the world better.
Back then, it was not so fashionable to be cynical.
I was part of the idealistic post World War II generation that was focussed on peace and international understanding, rebuilding war torn countries and creating new international organizations like the United Nations and the World Bank.
My first job was in the Marshall Plan.
There were plenty of domestic challenges, too.
The depression was a recent memory; poverty was high; and racial and gender discrimination was rampant, overt and legally sanctioned.
There was plenty of hope and optimism.
There were plenty of obvious challenges to meet and wrongs to right.
By the time I was in graduate school and beginning a professional career, there were also exciting new analytical tools to be tried out.
Macroeconomists were building models in order to improve forecasts and predict the effects of policy decisions.
Social policy analysts were beginning to measure policy outcomes, collect data on success and failure, and figure out cost effective strategies by doing actual experiments and learning from the results.
In retrospect, we were all a bit carried away with these new tools.
We didn't understand as well as you do now how really hard it is to make policy and how much the painstaking, nitty gritty work of implementation matters to the outcome.
We learned that on the job.
I feel unusually lucky to have been in some exciting places at times when big changes were going on that a public policy wonk and public servant could revel in being part of.
I was at the Department of Health, Education and Welfare in the 1960s, when the Great Society legislation had just passed and we were evaluating what worked and what didn't.
We were very hopeful about Head Start and compensatory education.
It was already clear that welfare needed reform.
Medicaid and Medicare were just getting going, but it was already obvious that they were going to be much more expensive than the original advocates thought and that delivering quality medical care at affordable prices was going to be a very difficult, continuing problem.
Some thirty years later, it still is.
I was at the Congressional Budget Office in the mid 1970s and early 1980s, when the struggle to get control of the Federal budget was just beginning.
Congress was impressed with the analytical strength the Administration had developed and wanted some number crunchers and policy wonks of their own.
I got the rare privilege of setting up a new government agency, making the rules, hiring the people, and getting it started.
I am very proud of CBO and the work it has done over the last 23 years.
I also had another rare privilege -- after some years of private sector activity -- of joining the Office of Management and Budget under the Clinton Administration, at just the moment when the mounting budget deficits clearly had to be dealt with.
Some of us had been struggling with the deficits, sounding warnings throughout the 1980s, saying things like "we'd better deal with the deficit now when the economy is growing because it will only get worse in a recession," and feeling that the country just wasn't listening.
Suddenly, we were sitting around a table with the President of the United States and creating a budget that would really reduce the deficit.
The deficit in fiscal year 1992 was $290 billion.
The optimists among us thought that, if we were tough and lucky, we might cut the deficit in half by 1997.
It's great to be part of a win.
The deficit has come down faster than even the optimists thought.
This year, we will actually have a budget surplus.
Nobody thought that was possible back in 1993.
Were we smart or lucky?
Some of each.
Everyone worked hard -- both Congress and the Administration.
Compromises were made.
The resulting budgets weren't anybody's ideal policy but they worked, and the economy has done much better than anyone dared hope.
Success always takes a combination of good policy and good luck; just as failure usually takes a combination of mistakes and bad luck.
Now I am lucky enough to be at the Federal Reserve at an especially fascinating time.
The U. S. economy is doing astonishingly well.
The economic growth is strong; the unemployment rate is at 4.3 percent for first time in decades; inflation is remarkably benign; and the U. S. industry is competing well around the world.
The challenge now is to keep the good news flowing and to keep the economy growing, without overheating, at the highest sustainable rate.
Keeping the economy growing is especially important right now as we try to reform welfare.
I could not have predicted when I was starting out with a graduate degree and a passion for public policy that I would be a player in such fascinating events.
You can't predict now what challenges will come your way.
If you jotted down this afternoon some guesses about the paths your careers would take over the next several decades, I can only guarantee you one thing: your guesses will prove to be quite wildly wrong.
Most of the exciting and rewarding challenges that will face you in your careers would seem quite improbable now.
I can only promise you that the challenges will be difficult and exciting.
But let me venture a few general predictions anyway.
I believe that compared to my generation of public service enthusiasts, fewer of you will focus on Federal government domestic policy and instead, more of your collective time, energy and effort will go into three overlapping areas: problems that cross national boundaries or that somehow involve work with other countries and cultures; problems at the intersection of the public and private sectors; problems that require mobilizing local community effort to achieve results.
The international point is obvious.
Borders don't count for so much anymore.
Environmental concerns -- the atmosphere, the oceans, the climate, and the forests involve international cooperation.
Economies are tied together more intimately.
Poverty, violence, refugees in one part of the world affect us all.
The Asian crisis has been a stark reminder that events in economies on the other side of the world -- in places that few of us know much about -- can affect us very directly.
The public/private borders are also blurring.
Most of you will wander back and forth over these indistinct boundaries as you organize partnerships, help public agencies imitate the successes of markets, and help private entities deal with their public responsibilities.
Rebuilding our cities will take builders, banks, housing authorities, schools, community organizations and governments.
And a lot of your effort, I predict, will be at the community level -- whether the community is a neighborhood, a town or city, rural area or some other piece of geography like a region or a watershed.
I'm not saying there aren't huge challenges at the federal level and exciting jobs to be done.
I hope some of you are headed for places like HHS, CBO, OMB and the Federal Reserve because we need you.
But I hope many of you are also headed for state and local governments, community efforts of all kinds, and mixed public/private jobs.
The problems that most people are now worried about (crime, drugs, decaying neighborhoods, training for new kinds of jobs, welfare reform, child welfare, strengthening families and neighborhoods) are not problems with national solutions.
Washington can make it easier or harder, but the real action is close to the ground.

