I understand that the SBE in the U.K. is comparable to the National Association for Business Economics in the U.S. As a long-standing member and fellow of NABE, I bring you greetings from your American counterparts.
I want to emphasize at the outset that the views I present this evening, both about the economic outlook and monetary policy, are my own views and should not be interpreted as an expression of the views of the Board of Governors or the FOMC.
This is a particularly interesting and challenging time to be a central banker, virtually anywhere in the world.
Interestingly, despite the common backdrop of weak world growth and turbulence in world foreign exchange and financial markets, there is an unusual diversity of domestic macroeconomic experiences across countries and therefore quite different challenges faced by monetary policymakers around the world.
To illustrate this, I will briefly set out what I see as the challenges faced today by central banks in the U.K., Japan, the euro area, and emerging market economies.
Then I will continue this theme as I turn my attention to the U.S. where, as you know, the macroeconomic record over the last three years has been exceptional.
Precisely because of this exceptional performance, there are puzzles to resolve and important policy issues to be confronted in the U.S.
I.
Global Influences on Domestic Economies and Challenges to Monetary Policy Around the World Today, it seems more than ever, domestic macroeconomic performance and policy around the world are being dramatically affected by global developments.
There are two features of the global environment to which I want to draw particular attention.
First, there is a considerable diversity of cyclical conditions across industrial economies.
Second, the serious crises in many emerging market economies, resulting in both sharp declines in their economic activity and turbulence in global foreign exchange and financial markets, have had repercussions throughout the global economy.
Overall, this adds up to unusually weak global growth, continuing risks of renewed financial market turbulence, and, at least outside the U.S., more downside risks to demand than upside potential.
As you well know, the robust expansion in the United States has been juxtaposed with unprecedented recession in Japan, while Europe, the U.K., and Canada have experienced more moderate growth than the U.S.
These differential growth rates among the industrial economies and resulting changes in their real interest rate differentials, and hence exchange rates, have had an important impact on net exports across these countries.
In the case of the U.S., these developments have interacted to result in a persistent drag from net exports on real output growth and a widening of the current account deficit, on the one hand, and restraint on inflation, on the other hand.
In light of concerns about wide swings in the exchange rates among major currencies, some have called for a system of target zones for exchange rates.
But the variety of economic conditions across industrial countries itself highlights the inherent difficulties associated with such suggestions.
Moving to such a system would require assigning monetary policy to the task of targeting exchange rates, and countries are free to do so if they wish.
But, given the very different domestic conditions across industrial countries today, the cost of ignoring domestic considerations in order to stabilize exchange rates would, in my judgment, be considerable.
My preference is to use monetary policy to stabilize the U.S. economy and I can imagine that central bankers in other major economies would share this sentiment with respect to their own economies.
The crises among emerging-market economies have resulted in a complex set of shocks to industrial economies.
The most obvious spillover is the adverse external demand shock, via the decline in net exports, as a result of the combination of sharp declines in economic activity and dramatic devaluation of currencies in many emerging market economies.
In the U.S., this has powerfully reinforced the effects on net exports of slower growth in the foreign G-10 economies and, until late in 1998, an appreciation of the dollar against the foreign G-10 currencies.
But the net effect on demand, both in the U.S. and in other industrial economies, has also been influenced by how each economy has been affected by other developments set in motion by these crises.
First, there have been safe haven capital flows that, in the case of the U.S., lowered long-term interest rates and buoyed equity markets.
Second, the slowing of aggregate demand globally has also depressed the prices of oil and other commodities.
While the U.S. oil and agricultural sectors have been hurt by this downturn in the prices of their output, the economy as a whole has benefited on balance because the United States is a net consumer and importer of oil and many other commodities.
The decline in energy and other commodity prices have helped to restrain inflationary pressures, and households and firms that depend on these items as inputs to their production have benefited accordingly.
Until the Russian default and devaluation, the positive effects of lower interest rates and lower oil and non-oil commodity prices appeared to have contributed importantly to the strength of domestic demand in the U.S., offsetting, at least in part, the adverse effect on net exports.
After the default and devaluation in Russia, increased perception of and reduced tolerance for risk resulted in turbulence in domestic financial markets in industrial economies, as demonstrated by increased risk spreads and reduced liquidity, especially in the U.S.
While risk spreads may have been unduly narrow to begin with, the degree to which they increased in reaction to that event surprised most observers, myself included.
One reason these market developments appeared to be so serious for the U.S. was that they threatened to reverse the improvement in domestic financial conditions that had been so important in blunting the adverse demand shock from abroad.
The Challenges Facing Monetary Policy Around the World Despite the common backdrop of weak world demand and turbulence in global financial markets, the diversity of domestic economic conditions around the world translates into a variety of challenges facing central banks.
In the U.K., for example, what had looked like a traditional late-cycle challenge of resisting any tendency for inflation to increase, relative to the official target, while avoiding a premature halt in the expansion, has been complicated by the adverse shock from abroad.
I will pose some questions, for your consideration, about the relative experiences in the U.S. and the U.K., once I have set out some of the puzzles in the U.S. experience.
The current conditions and challenges in Japan are very different.
Japanese policymakers are confronted with the challenge of escaping from recession, amidst gathering deflation and serious banking and financial sector problems.
Monetary policy, with short-term interest rates almost at zero, appears to have now all but exhausted the potential for stimulus associated with conventional measures.
The Bank of Japan is operating in fairly uncharted waters and, frankly, the questions they face are easier to pose than to answer.
Is it possible, for example, once short rates have been pushed to zero, to use open market operations in long-term markets to lower long rates relative to short rates?
Is it possible to push long-term rates below 2%, even when short-term rates are driven to zero?
The U.S. experience in the Great Depression appears to confirm Keynes' worry that, despite the ability of monetary policymakers to push short-term rates to zero, there are limits on how low long-term rates can be driven.
This raises the question as to whether the decline in Japanese 10-year rates to below ¾% in 1998 was a temporary aberration, and the return to 2% might therefore not be easy to reverse.
Even if monetary policy cannot affect short or long-term rates, is it possible nevertheless to stimulate demand by forcing liquidity into the system and raising monetary growth, and, if so, through what channels would that operate?
Finally, if the major channel for such stimulus is depreciation of the yen, are the emerging market economies in Asia strong enough to withstand this development without a relapse?
The euro area is facing its own unique challenges.
The initial policy setting was skillfully managed despite tension between the new central bank and finance ministries of the member countries.
But growth appears to be slowing to below trend, in the context of already very high unemployment rates, not all of which is structural, and low inflation.
At the same time, the need for the ECB to establish credibility, to demonstrate its independence relative to finance ministries, and to establish a euro-wide perspective in a structure that gives considerable power on the ECB's Governing Council to national central banks adds to these challenges.
Nowhere, however, is the challenge to monetary policymakers greater than in emerging economies around the world.
Here the issues have centered on how aggressively to raise interest rates to defend pegged exchange rate regimes and, in the event of a change to floating rates, how aggressively to tighten to avoid overshooting of exchange rates and how to establish a monetary policy framework to control inflation.
The challenge of setting monetary policy following a move from fixed to floating rates has proved to be especially difficult, as events in Brazil have illustrated.
Monetary policymakers have had to balance the role of higher interest rates in avoiding overshooting of the currency and controlling inflation, against their effects on the real economy, on financial instability in light of potential banking and corporate debt problems, and on fiscal deficits via higher debt-service burdens.
II.
The U.S. Outlook: Puzzles, Initial Conditions and Prospects That brings me to the U.S.
Many would ask what challenges could monetary policymakers possibly face in the U.S., given the remarkable combination of consistent above-trend growth and declining inflation?
The first inclination, to be sure, is to celebrate.
The next is to line up to take some of the credit, although I have urged some caution here.
Recent performance is both better than expected and better than most of us thought the structure of the economy would allow.
Humility seems very much in order.
Indeed, the uncertainties about the structure of the economy, in light of the unexpected nature of recent performance, and about the outlook going forward, in light of the recent poor record of forecasting, highlight the challenges facing U.S. policymakers.
The U.S. economy has been blessed with consistent above-trend growth, declining unemployment rates, soaring equity prices, and declining inflation.
Mixing these elements together yields the following story.
The unexpected strength in equity prices has combined with other positive demand surprises across a wide range of spending components to produce faster-than-expected growth and a progressive tightening of labor markets.
At the same time, some combination of favorable supply shocks and supply-enhancing structural changes have prevented the pick-up in inflation that otherwise would have been expected from persistently robust demand and progressively higher labor utilization rates.
The Role of Excess Demand, Supply Shocks, and Productivity It appears that both supply shocks and structural change have played a part in explaining the recent exceptional U.S. economic performance.
Therefore, let me turn to the role of these developments in U.S. inflation dynamics.
In the long run, inflation is, as Milton Friedman has taught us, always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.
But that still leaves us to identify the proximate sources of changes of inflation, the role of transitory shocks, and the effect of possible changes in NAIRU and/or the productivity trend.
The two key proximate sources of inflation pressure are excess demand and supply shocks.
Traditionally, excess demand pressures are viewed as operating initially through wage pressures in labor markets and being passed through via higher unit labor costs to prices.
Labor market pressures are often judged by the relationship between the prevailing unemployment rate and NAIRU, the "non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment."
Supply shocks refer to the effect on inflation of changes in the prices of specific commodities that are unrelated to the balance between supply and demand in the domestic economy.
Historically, the important supply shocks have been sharp movements in food or energy prices, often related to weather and political developments.
In the current episode in the U.S., important sources of restraint in inflation have come from a decline in energy prices over the past two years; a three-year period, through mid 1998, of appreciation of the dollar and declining import prices; sharper-than-previous declines in computer prices over the past three years; and a slower rate of increase in health care prices, including the cost of health care insurance.
The direct impact of supply shocks depends on the weight of the affected goods and services in broader price measures.
Indirect effects arise both from the role of those goods and services as inputs in production and through the effect on the wage-price process.
A decline in overall inflation via favorable supply shocks lowers the pressure for nominal wage increases, which, in turn, reduces price pressures for a broader range of goods and services.
An increase in trend productivity growth will result in higher real wage growth, but the transition to higher real wages may include a near-term decline in inflation.
For example, an unexpected acceleration in productivity might initially leave nominal wage change unaffected, but reduce price pressures by lowering costs--thus contributing to both higher real wage growth and, for a while, lower inflation.
One additional feature of recent experience that might also be important is the divergence between measures of labor market and product market demand balance.
While the unemployment rate has declined to a 28-year low and to well below prevailing estimates of NAIRU, the capacity utilization rate is below its long-term average and estimates of its natural rate.
It appears that a portion of the higher productivity growth has come through capital deepening and more generally has been associated with very rapid growth in the capital stock--especially high-tech equipment.
The relevance of this development is that the absence of demand pressures in product markets likely contributes to the perceived absence of pricing leverage by good-producing firms.
In addition, the resulting difficulty in passing on cost increases may have made firms more reluctant to bid up the price of workers in tight labor markets, resulting in restraint on nominal wage demands and contributing to the apparent decline in NAIRU.
Collectively, these factors--favorable supply shocks, a lower NAIRU and higher trend growth, and the gap between the unemployment and capacity utilization rates--can explain the combination of higher-than-expected growth, a decline in the unemployment rate well below previous estimates of NAIRU, and lower-than-expected inflation.
Nevertheless, the relative importance of the various factors and uncertainty about their relative importance have important implications for monetary policy.
Lessons from Experience in Other Industrial Economies?
I wonder whether developments in other industrial economies, and specifically in the U.K., might shed some light on the relative importance of the various sources of exceptional U.S. performance.
Here again I have more questions than answers, but shall rely on you for assistance.
If increased worker insecurity, as a result of rapid technological change and globalization, has been important in lowering NAIRU and improving the inflation-unemployment trade-off in the U.S., why isn't this force having a similar effect in the U.K.?
Or is it?
If more rapid technological change is raising productivity growth in the U.S., why does the discussion here seem to be focused on whether or not there has been a decline in trend productivity growth?
Are there barriers in the U.K., for example labor resistance, to adopting new technologies and reorganizing production?
Is there any indication in the U.K. of a divergence between unemployment and capacity utilization rates, as experienced in the U.S?
Finally, if supply shocks and currency appreciation lower inflation in the U.S., allowing the economy to move temporarily beyond the point of sustainable capacity without inflationary consequences, why isn't the same true of the U.K, which itself has experienced falling commodity prices and a rising currency?
Prospects In thinking about the outlook for the U.S. economy, I start with questions about the interpretation of initial conditions.
Following three years of exceptional performance, there are some areas where the economy looks stretched and where there might be some question about sustainability.
For example, is the current state of labor market tightness sustainable, without rising inflation, once the recent favorable supply shocks dissipate?
Is the current level of equity prices sustainable, without further declines in real interest rates and under the assumption of some slowing in growth toward trend going forward?
Is the prevailing and still widening current account deficit sustainable or does it carry important risks to U.S. interest rates and exchange rates going forward?
Despite the recent exceptional performance, these questions are challenging ones.
The next question is whether, going forward, developments will resolve some of these possible tensions or exacerbate them.
The consensus forecast, for example, continues to project a slowdown to below-trend growth, resulting in a gradual increase in unemployment.
This would immediately unwind some of the prevailing tightness in labor markets and, as a result, holds open the possibility that the economy will make a successful transition to a more sustainable state, without policy intervention, before the effects of the recent favorable supply shocks fully dissipate.
The FOMC's central tendency forecast, released earlier this week in the semi-annual Humphrey-Hawkins report, projects growth in the 2 ½% - 3% range and a nearly unchanged unemployment rate--still a slowdown, but only to trend growth.
A more modest slowdown would maintain the current level of labor market tightness and therefore make my first question about sustainability more critical.
Both the consensus and FOMC forecasts projects higher inflation.
However, the increase in inflation is principally a result of the dissipation of the direct effects of recent favorable supply shocks.
As a result, overall CPI inflation converges to recent core inflation.
Because the effects of recent declines in inflation are still working through the wage-price process, nominal wage demands are likely to be restrained going forward, at least for a while.
As a result, core measures of inflation are expected to remain well contained and nearly unchanged over 1999.
The most recent inflation data continue to appear consistent with this expectation, showing no signs of any rebound in core inflation.
The latest Blue Chip consensus forecast projects just a 2% increase in the CPI over 1999, while the central tendency for the FOMC consensus forecast is in the 2 ¼% - 2 ½% range.
III.
The Challenges Facing U.S. Monetary Policy I now turn to the challenge of designing a strategy for monetary policy in light of uncertainties both about the sources of recent performance and about the outlook going forward.
Implications of Supply Shocks and Structural Change for Monetary Policy The relative importance of supply shocks and structural change has important implications for monetary policy.
For example, if the recent exceptional U.S. economic performance were entirely due to the temporary effects of favorable supply shocks, the economy's level of production might be interpreted as being beyond its sustainable capacity, with the inflationary consequences temporarily suppressed by the favorable supply shocks.
The challenge for monetary policy would be to make the transition from the current exceptional but unsustainable state to a less exceptional but more sustainable one, prior to the supply shocks fully dissipating.
On the other hand, if the recent performance is accounted for entirely by supply-enhancing structural changes and, therefore, reflects the new, more favorable performance characteristics of the U.S. economy, the role of monetary policy is to accommodate this more favorable performance rather than to constrain it.
But the key is that both explanations--favorable supply shocks and capacity-enhancing structural change--appear to be part of the story behind the exceptional performance, with some uncertainty about the relative weight that should be assigned to each explanation.
The challenge is to set a strategy that respects this uncertainty, takes advantages of opportunities for better performance, while mitigating the risks of overtaxing the limits of sustainable production and growth.
Monetary Policy Strategy: Principles and Practice Let me now turn to how U.S. monetary policy has responded during this episode and to the challenges that it faces going forward.
I will describe the evolution of monetary policy in relation to the strategy embodied in the Taylor Rule.
I refer to the Taylor Rule not because the Federal Reserve follows such a specific rule, but because this rule highlights the systematic policy responses to changing economic conditions that one expects in disciplined discretionary policy.
The Taylor Rule prescribes movements in real interest rates in response to deviations of inflation from the policymakers' inflation target and to deviations of output from its long-run potential (or to deviations in the unemployment rate from its natural rate).
These responses impose what I believe are the two key ingredients for a disciplined monetary policy strategy: a nominal anchor (via the inflation target) and a policy that leans against cyclical winds (via the response to changes in resource utilization rates).
During most of the recent episode, monetary policy broadly followed the Taylor Rule prescription, while holding the nominal federal funds rate about unchanged.
Since 1995, the simultaneous declines in the unemployment rate (as a result of faster than expected growth) and lower-than-expected inflation had almost perfectly offsetting effects on the target nominal federal funds rate.
That is, the prescriptions for the target funds rate from the two surprises just offset, leaving an unchanged nominal funds rate target consistent with the Taylor Rule.
The drop in the unemployment rate outweighed the fall in inflation in terms of the prescription for real rates, but the higher real federal funds rate prescribed by the Taylor Rule was achieved passively via declines in inflation, without the need for an increase in nominal funds rate.
More recently, however, monetary policy has significantly departed from the Taylor Rule prescription.
That is, the nominal funds rate today is lower than could be justified by typical Taylor Rules, given prevailing inflation and labor utilization rates.
How did this happen and what does it mean?
The FOMC, of course, is not committed to a Taylor Rule and only some of us pay significant attention to it.
Still I believe there is a story here.
There are three developments, each of which, I believe, contributed to this decline in the funds rate relative to Taylor Rule prescription.
The first event was the dramatic financial market turbulence, following the Russian default and devaluation.
The decline in the federal funds rate was, in my view, appropriate to offset the sharp deterioration in financial market conditions, including wider private risk spreads, evidence of tighter underwriting and loan terms at banks, and sharply reduced liquidity in financial markets.
In effect, a decline in the funds rate was required to maintain unchanged overall financial conditions following the disruption to private capital markets.
This was intended to ensure that monetary policy and overall financial conditions remained consistent with a forecast of a benign slowdown in U.S. growth.
But the events following the Russian default and devaluation seemed to call for easing rather than just maintaining the prevailing degree of financial market conditions.
Specifically, even at prevailing financial conditions, weaker foreign growth threatened to transform what was otherwise expected to be a benign slowdown into one that might be excessive, particularly given what also appeared to be asymmetrical downside risks in the global economy.
Because the incoming data continued to look resilient, a backward-looking Taylor Rule would not have dictated an easing.
But a forward-looking version of the Taylor Rule did, in my view, justify the policy action, at least given the revision in my own expectations for growth going forward.
This was a classic example of pre-emptive policy response, of policy responding to the forecast rather than to the data in hand.
The third development is the reduced confidence of some (not including yours truly) in the traditional model of inflation dynamics and the appreciation by nearly everyone of increased uncertainty about the estimate of NAIRU, in response to the persistence of faster-than-expected growth and lower-than-expected inflation.
The Challenges Ahead As events have unfolded, the economy retained more momentum than most expected and financial market conditions have improved, though, to be sure, had the Federal Reserve not responded so quickly and aggressively, there is some question as to whether financial markets would have recovered as much as they have.
This brings us to the challenges policy faces going forward and to the questions that have to be addressed in meeting these challenges.
Once again, I'll specialize in questions.
The first question is whether the degree of easing implemented in response to financial market turbulence and the abrupt downward revision in the forecast should be reassessed in light of the subsequent improvement in financial conditions and the continued robustness of domestic demand.
Such a reassessment would, of course, also have to take into account both the incoming data on inflation and the downside risks to the U.S. economy, including those related to the continuing stresses in the global economy.
The second question is how to position policy, given uncertainty about the relative roles of supply shocks and structural change.
One way to rationalize the current policy setting is that the movement away from the Taylor Rule prescription reflects a lack of confidence in the assumption about NAIRU that underpins the typical specification of that rule.
After all, the precise specification of the Taylor Rule requires an estimate of the level of potential output or NAIRU.
In effect, uncertainty about NAIRU can be interpreted as having made monetary policy reluctant to move on the basis of declines in the unemployment rate relative to some given estimate of NAIRU.
While this could be rationalized as an appropriate response to uncertainty about the level of NAIRU, such a strategy positions monetary policy to accommodate continued above-trend growth and further increases in labor market tightness with faster money growth, in order to preserve the prevailing level of nominal federal funds rate.
This would result in a monetary policy that reinforced rather than leaned against the cyclical winds, at least until actual price data confirmed that NAIRU had been passed.
Given that the unemployment rate is now so low relative to the range of estimates of NAIRU, and given the long lags between policy actions and the effect on inflation, continuing such an accommodative strategy would run a substantial risk of unleashing inflation pressures that would be disruptive to reverse.
This may not be an issue going forward, however, given that both the consensus and FOMC forecasts project a slowing to or below trend growth and therefore no further tightening in labor markets.

New financial instruments, innovations in portfolio management, and the technological capability of implementing new risk management strategies offer opportunities to reduce risk and to improve efficiency by allocating risk to those most willing to accept it.
Reductions of trade barriers and the freer flow of financial capital around the world mean better resource allocation, improved productivity, and higher standards of living for citizens of the United States and many other nations.
While the current and potential benefits of financial and technological change are real and substantial, they do not come without some costs.
For example, the rapid pace of technological change and the wide array of innovative financing techniques have in some ways made it more difficult for outside investors and policymakers to evaluate the risks borne by individual institutions and the broader markets.
And, nearly instantaneous communications and heightened interdependencies among nations speed the effects of poor investment and policy decisions around the globe.
Recent experiences in Asia, Russia, Latin America, and at home have taught us a lot about the risks of an increasingly interdependent world linked by complex financial relationships.
In this rapidly evolving world of inevitable benefits and costs, the key question for both financial policymakers and market participants is: How can we retain the benefits of rapid technological and financial innovation and of freer movements of goods and financial capital across national borders, while simultaneously protecting our financial institutions and markets from the risks that these changes might bring?
This is not a new question, and I am sure that most of this audience is well aware that many efforts are underway in both the public and private sectors to address the variety of issues that this question evokes.
As always, there are no simple answers.
But I believe that a number of fundamental principles have emerged that should be used to help shape both public and private policies and practices.
Private Market Discipline Is the First Line of Defense Perhaps the most fundamental principle that must guide us is that private market participants are the first line of defense against excessive private and public risk in the financial system.
Private borrowers, lenders, investors, institutions, traders, brokers, exchanges, and clearing systems all have huge stakes in containing their risks as individual agents and risks to the system as a whole.
Private market participants can discourage excessive risk taking by choosing to do business with those firms that demonstrate sound risk management systems and portfolios that balance appropriately risk and expected return.
If private markets are going to perform their risk control functions, then market prices must send the right signals to all participants about the risks and rewards of a particular transaction or at a given firm.
In order to improve the ability of market prices to accurately reflect risks and returns, I believe that we should take action ourselves and encourage action by others in at least three areas.
First, we should seek ways of improving the transparency of financial institutions and markets.
As we all know, full information is a fundamental requirement of free and competitive markets.
More particularly, financial institutions and individual investors must be well informed about their own and their counterparties' exposures, the nature of new financial instruments, and the extent of overall market liquidity.
I believe that banks and other financial institutions could significantly improve their disclosures by providing more information to the market about their risk management policies and practices and about the values of internal risk measures.
At present, the market seems to grant great weight to bank regulatory capital ratios that are only crude indicators of an institution's risk profile.
That attention is driven in large part by the fact that these regulatory measures provide a consistent basis for comparison.
The regulatory and financial communities should work together to identify more meaningful statistics to meet the market's needs.
At the international level much work is being done, and much remains.
One of the key lessons of our most recent financial crises is that international accounting and public disclosure standards are often inadequate.
An important step forward was the publication last November by the international Basle Committee on Banking Supervision of guidelines for enhancing bank transparency.
That report provides guidance to banks and banking supervisors around the world on the nature of core disclosures that should be provided to the public.
Much more, however, should be done to provide the public and supervisors with the information they need to exert effective market discipline.
A second area where we could improve market discipline is in affecting how market participants view what has come to be known as the too-big-to-fail problem.
In this regard, I would emphasize that the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991, or FDICIA, contains rather tough language about too-big-to-fail--language that I assure you the Board takes very seriously.
Perhaps it would be useful to review briefly what the law says.
FDICIA requires that, regardless of the size of a bank, the bank resolution method chosen by the FDIC be the least costly of all possible methods for meeting the FDIC's obligation to protect insured deposits.
In addition, FDICIA prohibits the FDIC from assisting uninsured depositors and creditors, or shareholders of an insured depository institution.
Add to these FDICIA provisions the depositor preference provisions in the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, and you have some rather potent reasons for the market to be disciplined in its dealings with insured depositories.
The only exception to these obligations is the so-called "systemic risk exception."
But the systemic risk exception is quite tough and explicit.
It requires concurrence by two-thirds of the Federal Reserve Board, two-thirds of the FDIC Board, and the Secretary of Treasury in consultation with the President that conformance with least-cost resolution would "have serious adverse effects on economic conditions or financial activity" before the FDIC is allowed to "take other action or provide assistance as necessary to avoid or mitigate such effects."
In addition, if the systemic risk exception is used, any insurance fund losses arising from such exceptional actions must be recovered through special assessments on all depository institutions that are members of the relevant federal deposit insurance fund.
Lastly, the Comptroller General must subsequently review the agencies' actions and report its findings to Congress.
The sum total of these conditions establishes, in my view, a rather high hurdle that must be cleared before the systemic risk exception can be used.
The FDICIA and other reforms have, I believe, altered market perceptions of too-big-to-fail.
Nonetheless, the obvious need for the central bank and other government agencies to prevent a systemic collapse of the banking and financial system, the creation of seemingly ever-larger financial organizations, and the inherent uncertainties involved in the management of any crisis leave room for doubt in some observers' minds.
Perhaps by its very nature this is an issue that can never be fully resolved.
But it seems clear to me that any institution, regardless of size, can fail in the sense that existing stockholders can lose their total investment, existing management can be replaced, and uninsured creditors can suffer losses.
In some cases it may be necessary for an institution to stay in operation and be wound down in an orderly way over a transition period.
Ultimately, the institution could be sold in whole or in part.
But even in such cases the expectation of owners, managers, and uninsured creditors should be that real and significant losses will be incurred.
In my judgment, if policies consistent with these principles are followed, then we will have eliminated much of the moral hazard associated with the federal safety net for depository institutions while simultaneously being able to achieve our goal of preserving financial stability.
One way to enhance the ability of market participants to limit risk taking by banks might be to require at least the largest and most complex banks to issue a minimum amount of subordinated debt.
Many such proposals have surfaced over the last decade, including some from within the Federal Reserve System.
And while I think that it is premature to endorse any one proposal, indeed there are a number of thorny details that would need to be worked out, I am strongly attracted to the basic concept advanced by proponents of subordinated debt.
The fundamental notion behind requiring at least some banks to issue traded subordinated debt is to create a set of uninsured bank creditors whose risk preferences are similar to those of bank supervisors.
Because subordinated debt holders have downside risk, but virtually no upside potential, subordinated debt holders tend to be risk averse in much the same way as is the FDIC.
Thus, when a bank sought to issue subordinated debt the price that investors were willing to pay would bring direct market discipline aimed at controlling excessive risk taking by the bank.
A second key objective is to create a set of market instruments that would provide clear, and frequent, signals of the market's evaluation of a bank's financial condition.
Such signals could act as a deterrent to a bank's tendency to take excessive risk, and could perhaps alert bank supervisors to examine, or otherwise intervene in, a bank more quickly than they otherwise would.
Changes in the market prices of traded bank subordinated debt, and perhaps other actions by the owners of this debt, have the potential to provide such signals.
In this way subordinated debt could be used to bring indirect market discipline on a bank.
Supervisory Discipline Must Be An Effective and Dynamic Second Line of Defense While market discipline must be our first line of defense for ensuring financial stability, bank supervision also has an important role to play.
The very nature of a systemic disruption, which imposes costs on not only the perpetrators, but also on many and diverse economic agents far removed from the immediate event, means that market participants find it impossible to fully incorporate systemic risks into market prices.
Indeed, it is this very aspect of systemic risk that justifies the existence of a government safety net for depository institutions.
The inevitable moral hazard of the safety net requires that bank supervisors have the ability to exert supervisory discipline on the riskiness of banks.
I would like to comment tonight on what I consider two of the most pressing needs in the bank supervisory area: the need to make capital standards more risk sensitive, and the need to focus supervisory practice more on risk measurement and management.
I need not explain to this audience why the maintenance of strong capital positions is critical to the preservation of a safe and sound banking system.
Indeed, ensuring strong capital has been a cornerstone of bank supervision for decades.
However, the development by some of our largest and most complex banks of increasingly sophisticated models for measuring, managing, and pricing risk has called into question the continuing usefulness of the current capital standards--the so-called risk-based capital standards--that are part of the Basle Accord.
The Basle Accord capital standards were adopted in 1988 by most of the world's industrialized nations in an effort to encourage stronger capital at riskier banks, to include off-balance sheet exposures in the assessment of capital adequacy, and to establish more consistent capital standards across nations.
The Accord was a major advance in 1988, and initially proved to be very useful in promoting safety and soundness goals.
But in recent years calls for reform have begun to grow.
I will outline briefly one of the key problems we are currently facing with the Basle Accord.
The Basle Accord divides on- and off-balance sheet assets of banks into four risk buckets, and then applies a different capital weight to each bucket.
The basic idea is that more capital should be required to be held against riskier assets.
However, the relationship is rough.
Perhaps most troublesome, the same risk weight is applied to all loans.
Thus, for example, a loan to a very risky "junk bond" company gets the same weight as a loan to a "triple A" rated firm.
While the Accord has the virtue of being relatively easy to administer, it also clearly gives banks an incentive to sell or not to originate loans that their internal models say need less capital than is required by the Basle Accord.
Conversely, banks are encouraged to book loans that their models say require more capital than does the Basle standard.
Not surprisingly, some banks have devoted substantial resources to attempting to achieve both adjustments to their portfolios.
The resulting "regulatory arbitrage" surely causes some serious problems.
For one thing, it makes reported capital ratios -- a key measure of bank soundness used by supervisors and investors -- less meaningful for government supervisors and private analysts.
Efforts are currently underway to redress many of the deficiencies in the current Basle Accord.
But many of the issues are complex, and the optimal changes are still unclear.
A consensus does seem to have developed that the Accord must be more risk sensitive.
But how risk sensitive, and how should that risk sensitivity best be implemented?
I foresee a multi-staged process with perhaps some modest and relatively noncontroversial "fixes" being proposed, possibly in the very near future, and more fundamental reforms being developed and implemented over a period of several years.
Given the dynamic nature of change in the financial sector, such a phased, or evolutionary, approach to revising the Accord is probably not just the only practical strategy, but also the most prudent as well.
The need for an evolutionary approach can be made with perhaps even more force to other supervisory policies and procedures.
For example, the increasing use and sophistication of credit risk models at the largest and most complex domestic and foreign banks has profound implications for supervisory activities as well as capital regulation.
Understanding and evaluating credit risk models and related risk measurement techniques are quickly becoming required skills of bank supervisors.
This need is fueled by the ever-growing array of securitizations, credit derivatives, remote originations, financial guarantees, and a seemingly endless stream of other financial innovations.
Add to this the fantastic speed with which financial transactions can now be conducted, and one begins to get a feel for the many challenges facing bank supervisors.
With these realities in mind, supervisory practices at all of the banking agencies are changing.
Oversight of banks has become much more continuous and risk-focused than even a few years ago, especially at the largest and most complex organizations.
It is recognized that we can no longer rely on periodic on-site examinations to ensure that these large institutions are operating in a safe and sound manner, but rather must be assured that their risk management practices and internal controls are sound on an on-going basis.
Still, on-site examinations, in my judgment, remain critical.
However, on-site examinations must evolve to be both as effective and as unobtrusive as possible.
We are devoting substantial efforts to attracting, training, retaining, and using effectively the highly skilled personnel that modern bank examinations require.
The new procedures place greater importance on an institution's internal management processes, beginning at the top.
Consistent with the view that private agents are the first line of defense against excessive risk, boards of directors are expected to be actively involved in establishing the overall environment for taking risk, staying informed about the level of risks and how they are managed and controlled, and making sure that senior management is capable and has the resources it needs to be successful.
Management is expected to develop and implement the policies and procedures needed to conduct a banking business in a safe and sound manner.
Internal controls, evaluated by an independent internal auditing function, must be sound.

