Politicians often pay lip service to the importance of small business, but a look at the data shows that this lip service is right on the mark.
The role that small business plays in the economy, and the role that credit conditions play in determining the health of small business, are interesting and important topics.
A recent Federal Reserve Report on the Availability of Small Business Credit illustrates the importance of the role played by small business in the economy.
Over 20 million business entities filed tax returns in 1994, the vast majority of these being small businesses.
Small businesses employ more than half of the private work force and are responsible for approximately 50 percent of all sales and private gross domestic product, often in firms on the leading edge of technology.
The number of small businesses nationwide has grown at a brisk 5 percent pace in recent years.
These numbers have come about because of a positive environment for small business in the past few years.
Traditional lenders have eased standards and accommodated rising loan demand with attractive lending terms for creditworthy borrowers.
This has made it easier and faster for small businesses to borrow.
Increasingly, larger banks with active small business lending operations are applying consumer credit techniques to loans for very small firms.
In addition, community-based lending initiatives have generated many new programs to attract investors and financing to small enterprises in local communities.
What We Know To frame the conference, it might be worthwhile to spend time reviewing some of the important trends in lending to small business, and what these trends imply for small business access to credit.
Public and Private Sector Finance Small firms need and use credit.
Nearly three-fifths of all small businesses surveyed in the Federal Reserve's 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances used some form of credit.
While a large share of this credit is private, the public sector plays a role as well, through programs that mitigate small business lending risks.
Bank call reports indicate that from 1994 to 1998, there was a steady increase in commercial bank lending to small business, from $294 billion worth of small business loans in 1994 to $370 billion in 1998 (nearly 6 percent annual growth).
This growth in overall commercial bank lending suggests a rising business loan demand and a willingness of banks to accommodate that demand.
Small businesses that meet periodically with Federal Reserve Bank officials to discuss conditions in the twelve districts have been consistently upbeat about credit conditions.
One factor in this growth is competition.
The competition for business credits among banks and nonbanks has been intense in recent years and has resulted in aggressive marketing strategies, product innovation, and a wider range of services offered to small firms.
Another factor involved changes in the Community Reinvestment Act regulations, which now require larger financial institutions to collect and report data on loans made to small businesses and small farms.
As shown in the morning session of this conference, these data have provided useful new information about small business loan market penetration.
Bank Consolidation Recent mergers and acquisitions, involving many of the nation's largest and most geographically diverse banking institutions, have had a sizeable impact on the industry.
This consolidation has fueled a debate about the impact on small businesses.
Many small business owners fear that small community banks that are acquired by large regional or national banks may no longer have officials that are knowledgeable about their circumstances and responsive to their needs.
Business owners also fear that large financial institutions will have more profitable investment opportunities than the small business loan portfolios found in the banks they acquire.
Small business owners are also concerned that if they lose their local banking offices, they will have less access to banking services and loans.
But empirical evidence concerning the effects of bank consolidations on small business gives only weak confirmation to these fears.
Researchers have found that large banks do maintain lower ratios of small business loans to assets than do small banks.
Yet when small banks buy other small banks, the new entities tend to be more active small business lenders than the banks that were purchased.
A study of the new CRA data, reported in the September 1998 Federal Reserve Bulletin, also offers some important information about lending to small business.
While locally based commercial banks and thrift institutions play a role in the small business credit market, so do out-of-market providers.
Overall, the new CRA data reveal that out-of-market lenders are numerous in both urban and rural banking markets and they generally outnumber in-market institutions.
Bank and Non-Bank Competition for Small Business Credit There has been a decline in the commercial banks' share of overall lending.
The reason for the decline involves technological changes in communications and information storage that have enabled an increasing number of large firms to gain direct access to capital markets.
These same technological changes have facilitated competition from non-bank sources, such as thrifts, savings banks, credit unions, finance companies, insurance companies, mortgage companies, leasing companies, and the like.
Whatever the reasons for the overall trend in commercial bank lending, it has raised questions about the future role of commercial banks in providing credit to small businesses.
Banks are believed to have a comparative advantage in lending to small businesses largely due to their ability to assess and monitor the operation of enterprises in their local communities.
This factor particularly affects small business access to credit in rural areas.
Small banks experience a great deal of competition for deposits from money market mutual funds and other deposit taking institutions.
Rural banks today report that many of them are faced with static or declining deposit bases, a traditional source of low-cost funds.
Many rural bankers are seeing a large transfer of wealth as farms and businesses are liquidated upon the death of the owners.
In many cases, the funds on deposit at a local bank move with the new owners.
And these heirs frequently live and work in metropolitan communities located far from their original homes.
As they lose these low-cost, lendable funds, many rural banks are finding it more difficult to serve the credit needs of their customers.
Secondary Markets Another important development in overall credit markets has been the rapid growth of secondary loan markets.
Residential mortgages, credit card receivables, and automobile loans can and are easily bundled and sold in the secondary market.
Securitization enables lenders to improve their return on capital, achieve liquidity, and achieve balance sheet diversity.
And borrowers whose loans are eligible for securitization typically enjoy lower financing costs.
But apart from some successes found in SBA loan pools, small business loans are in general not easily securitized.
Highly diverse small business loans are not easily grouped into large homogeneous pools that credit agencies and investors can efficiently analyze.
Underwriting standards tend to vary among originators.
Until underwriting standards and documentation for these loans become more uniform and information for estimating the risk of loss more available, markets for securitized small business loans will remain small.
Other Impediments Faced by Small Firms Seeking Access to Credit There are still other impediments to the small business credit process.
All businesses face the cost of regulation and various legal constraints.
Small businesses typically have not reached a size or complexity to warrant functional specialization and often must chart an independent course through the rules and regulations that apply to them -- a costly and potentially burdensome proposition.
Lending to small businesses is generally riskier and more costly than lending to large firms.
Small businesses are very susceptible to swings in the economy and have a much higher failure rate than larger operations.
And, historically lenders have had difficulty determining the creditworthiness of small business loan applicants.
Small businesses are extremely diverse and range from small corner grocery stores to high tech data base managers and software providers.
This heterogeneity, together with widely varying uses of the borrowed funds, has made it difficult to develop general standards for assessing small business loan applications and has made evaluating such loans relatively expensive.
Small business owners must contend with lenders with varying underwriting standards, varying appetites for risk, and varying expected rates of return for loans they may approve.
The vagaries of local economies may also influence the likelihood that a small firm gets approved for credit.
The reason for denial may bear no relationship to the financial condition of the business, the level of reserves, or other financial characteristics of the business itself, but be based only on the conditions present in the local economy.
While small firms are faced with many impediments in gaining access to credit, new technologies, such as credit scoring, offer the promise of breaking down some of those barriers.
Credit scoring increases the consistency, speed, and often the accuracy of credit evaluations.
It also lowers the cost of gathering relevant information.
Moreover, credit scoring uses automated systems and loan decisions can be rendered in minutes or hours rather than in days and weeks.
However, bank regulators must continue to ensure that the bank's credit scoring models are accurate and nondiscriminatory.
What We Don't Know and Need to Learn More About While there are already rich sources of data provided by lenders meeting their CRA requirements and by national surveys of small business finances, one point of this conference is to focus on information needs.
For example, there is little information about the incidence of loan denials and the profile of the credit-constrained firms, especially those owned by women and minorities.
We know little about the application of flexible underwriting criteria and liberal repayment terms offered to small business borrowers and about how those firms perform when these techniques are utilized.
We should analyze further the continuing effects of bank consolidation, the use of credit scoring, and the increased incidence of out-of-market and non-bank financial service providers and the effects they have on small business credit markets.
We can also benefit from learning more about the kinds of technical assistance and information that assists women and minority owned small businesses become more attractive candidates for credit.
Look to the Future There are many reasons to be encouraged about the prospects for small business.
Our economy has experienced strong growth and this growth has been reflected in strong small business growth.
The globalization of the economy has brought opportunities for many small businesses to participate in international trade.
In addition to trying to promote a healthy economy, the Federal Reserve can help the process by doing what it can to improve data collection and analysis.
The Board is joining with its regional Federal Reserve Banks to collect and disseminate some of this information.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland and the Small Business Administration have an initiative to expand small business access to financing and business development technical assistance.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has developed a microenterprise-training curriculum, designed to provide lending and technical assistance training to organizations that offer services to micro-entrepreneurs.
And the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City will soon release proceedings from a national conference that explored the status of equity capital markets in rural America and the research about innovative ways of getting equity to rural entrepreneurs.

The past few years have been remarkable for your industry and for the economy as well.
Moreover, the connection between the exceptional economic performance of recent years, namely strong growth in output and incomes and low inflation, and prosperity in mortgage banking has been more than coincidence.
Subdued inflation has enabled mortgage interest rates to stay relatively low.
And that, together with the robust job market and healthy gains in income and lofty wealth positions, have propelled the demand for housing to extraordinary levels and with it the demand for new mortgages.
Last year, this sterling performance occurred despite the late summer disturbance to financial markets that rocked all market sectors, including the mortgage market.
Meanwhile, your industry continues to innovate in ways that are bringing down the costs to homeowners of financing and refinancing and that are facilitating the management of risk.
Today, I would like to expand on the economic setting facing your industry and comment on some noteworthy trends, as well as review how the mortgage industry has changed over the past half century.
The U.S. economy has turned in a spectacular performance in recent years.
Real GDP has advanced around 4 percent annually in each of the past three years.
Payroll employment has grown about 8 million since the end of 1995, and the civilian unemployment rate has fallen below 4-1/2 percent, the lowest reading in nearly three decades.
Despite tight labor market conditions, inflation has been well behaved.
The GDP price index--representing the price of all final goods and services that we produce--has decelerated in recent years and rose only 0.9 percent last year while the rise in the consumer price index slowed to 1-1/2 percent, aided by a large decline in energy prices.
Recent years have been especially good for the housing sector.
After averaging about 1.15 million newly constructed units in 1996 and 1997--fairly healthy levels by historical standards--starts of single-family houses surged to 1.27 million units in 1998, the highest level since the late 1970s.
Multifamily construction, which ran at relatively low levels in the early 1990s, also has been strong.
At the same time, shipments of manufactured homes have been trending up, last year accounting for nearly a fifth of new housing units.
Home sales, too, have been robust, spurting to nearly 900,000 units in 1998--an all-time high.
At the same time, existing home sales climbed to about 4-3/4 million, also a record.
Contributing to the strength in housing demand in recent years has been greater affordability.
The positive effects of the decline in mortgage rates and the rise in household income have more than offset the negative effects of rising home prices, lifting the National Association of Realtors' affordability index for existing homes last year to its highest level in a quarter century.
The improvement in affordability has been a key factor in elevating the home ownership rate to an all-time high.
Two-thirds of American households now own their homes, up sharply from just a few years ago.
Despite earlier concerns, demographic underpinnings for housing demand have held up surprisingly well.
According to the latest estimates from the Census Bureau, household formations have averaged more than 1.1 million per year in the 1990s, only slightly below the robust pace of the 1980s.
Fears had been that the formation of households would slow, given that the baby-bust generation is passing through the prime years for forming households, a factor that, by itself, should have significantly reduced household formations.
However, more supporting than expected were a continued large influx of immigrants and delayed household formations by the trailing edge of the baby boom generation.
Many people in that cohort put off forming a household for a considerable time, owing mainly to the high cost of purchasing a single-family home, but have done so in recent years, as affordability of housing overall has improved.
In addition to demographic trends and affordability, housing demand has been boosted by a marked uptrend in second home demand--according to many reports--and by the replacement of units destroyed by natural disasters, such as fires and floods, and those demolished to make way for other uses, such as commercial development.
Estimates suggest that such replacement demands have been averaging about 200,000 units per year.
Record housing activity has been translated into record mortgage activity.
Last year, lenders originated an estimated $1.5 trillion in new mortgages for purchasing homes and refinancing existing mortgages--up about 75 percent from 1997.
This tremendous demand for mortgage credit was fueled by attractive rates on fixed-rate mortgages, which touched three-decade lows early last fall.
Not surprisingly, homeowners flooded mortgage bankers with refinancing requests, seeking to lock in exceptionally attractive terms on fixed-rate loans and pay off higher coupon mortgages.
This year, rates on standard thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages have continued to hover around 7 percent, and the MBA home purchase index, after adjusting for seasonal variations, has remained at an elevated level, although it is down somewhat from the peak late last year.
Mortgage refinancings have fallen off more sharply, even though many loans would still appear to be ripe for refinancing--especially those with rates above 8 percent.
Such loans represent nearly 25 percent of the outstanding mortgages held by Fannie Mae, for example.
However, given last year's prolonged period of low mortgage rates, one wonders whether many of those who have not yet refinanced will do so, even if mortgage rates remain at their current levels.
Mortgage originations, of course, are linked closely to the sale or refinancing of existing homes as well as to sales of new homes.
The underlying level of existing home sales is related to the size of the stock of housing units, as is the level of refinancing that results when, for example, mortgage rates decline.
In fact, annual turnover rates for owner-occupied units have been trending up in recent years.
Both turnover of existing homes and refinancing of existing mortgages tend to give rise to more mortgage debt outstanding, even when one mortgage is retired at the time a new one is created: When home prices are rising, the new mortgage on the home being sold typically is larger than the one being retired, especially on those existing mortgages that have had time to amortize; similarly, many of those who refinance their current home use the occasion to take out some accumulated equity--an issue to which I shall return shortly.
While existing home sales are related to an inexorably rising stock of homes, new home starts and sales are affected by the change in that stock.
The latter has been flat to declining in recent decades as the underlying pace of household formations has slowed.
Over time, therefore, the ratio of new home sales to existing home sales has trended down: In the late 1960s, the level of new home sales was about a third that of existing home sales, but in recent years that ratio has fallen to less than twenty percent, implying that the larger share of your business has been directed to the financing of turnover of existing homes.
The accessibility of the mortgage market to a wide variety of households has facilitated the extraction of equity in home ownership.
Close to a fourth of the wealth of U.S. households, as you know, is in the form of equity in owner-occupied housing.
When house prices increase, the level of this wealth--in the form of capital gains--rises, a substantial part of which is extracted as cash, mainly as a consequence of home turnover.
We estimate, based on a median period of owning a home of nine years, that each home sale since 1995 has averaged roughly $35,000 in capital gains, implying a total of $150 billion annually for the economy as a whole.
This is largely in the form of unencumbered cash, since, generally speaking, we find that the mortgage taken out by the buyer exceeds that of the remaining balance of the seller by something close to the realized capital gain.
In addition, cash is extracted from unrealized capital gains through the refinancing process.
While it is difficult to know precisely, at least a third to half of homeowners took some cash out when they refinanced their mortgages last year.
One might expect that a significant portion of the unencumbered cash received by sellers and refinancers was used to purchase goods and services.
Indeed, at a simple level there is a significant correlation between our estimates of overall sellers' extraction of cash from home equity and personal consumption expenditures.
However, in more elaborate models of consumer spending, we have not been able to find much incremental explanatory power of such extraction.
Perhaps this is because sellers' extraction is sufficiently correlated with other variables in the model, such as stock-market wealth, that the model has difficulty disentangling these influences.
That said, the equity extracted from housing does not fall unexpectedly into the sellers' laps all of a sudden.
People who own a home likely have a sense of the appreciation in its value over the years.
These unrealized gains may be factored into their long-term planning, and thus may influence spending on goods and services both well before and after the home is sold, rendering it difficult for models to capture this influence.
For example, a middle-aged person who is sitting on a substantial unrealized gain in his or her house, but does not plan to sell for ten years, may still boost consumption today in anticipation of the realization of that gain.
Alternatively, people who sell when they retire and extract substantial equity may invest much of the cash in financial assets--rather than spending a big chunk of it immediately--and plan to draw them down gradually over their retirement years.
I would now like to turn to developments more directly affecting your industry.
Prior to World War II, the mortgage banking industry was characterized by a small number of firms originating and selling loans to mortgage investors.
The bulk of mortgage originations--and funding--were done by the thrift industry, primarily savings and loans.
During the 1950s and 1960s, the mortgage banking industry's primary focus changed almost exclusively to the origination of FHA and VA loans, while S&Ls dominated the more popular conventional mortgage market.
During the 1970s, the mortgage banking industry emerged from being a fringe player to being a primary supplier of loans because of the expansion of the secondary mortgage market.
Initiated in 1970 by the issuance of the first Ginnie Mae pass-through security, and followed by Freddie Mac's sale of mortgage-backed securities backed by conventional loans in 1971, the mortgage-backed securities market grew dramatically, reflecting the wide acceptance of these securities by the investor community.
This was also a time when the principal mortgage lenders, savings and loans, were sometimes constrained from satisfying mortgage demands by binding Regulation Q ceilings that eroded their deposit base.
In these difficult times, the development of the MBS market helped to provide a safety valve.
By the mid-1980s, the channels for mortgage originations and holdings had become quite diverse, with the traditional depositories competing against mortgage brokers and mortgage bankers, who sold their loans not only to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, but to others as well.
This greater institutional diversity in the sources of mortgage finance played a key role in maintaining the uninterrupted flow of mortgage credit during the biggest financial debacle since the Great Depression--the S&L crisis of the late 1980s.
The resiliency of the mortgage credit market during this period highlights the value of having a diverse set of financial institutions and financial markets that serve a key sector of the economy, such as housing.
Greater stability in the supply of mortgage credit has been accompanied by the unbundling of the various aspects of the mortgage process.
Some institutions act as mortgage bankers, screening applicants and originating loans.
Other parties service mortgage loans, a function for which efficiencies seem to be gained by large-scale operations.
Still others, mostly with stable funding bases, provide the permanent financing of mortgages through participation in mortgage pools.
Beyond this, some others slice cash flows from mortgage pools into special tranches that appeal to a wider group of investors.
In the process, mortgage-backed securities outstanding have grown to a staggering $2.4 trillion.
These developments, along with a more stable financial environment, have helped to lower mortgage rates to borrowers by shrinking the spread between the long-term fixed mortgage rate on conforming loans and the comparable rate on Treasury notes.
This spread has averaged about 140 basis points in the 1990s, compared to an average of more than 210 basis points in the previous decade.
It widened a good bit during the global financial crisis triggered by the Russian default last August, but more recently has returned closer to the norms of recent years, as investors have become less concerned about liquidity and more concerned about getting higher yields.
The market for nonconforming mortgages--that is, mortgages that exceed the size that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are permitted to purchase--has also benefitted from advances in the mortgage securities market.
As this market has matured, financing for these loans has become more readily available, helping to lower borrowing costs to these homebuyers, too.
While the advances in housing finance in the 1980s included a variety of new mortgage products, those in the 1990s are much more pervasive, taking the form of improvements in the way mortgages are underwritten, originated, and serviced, which is benefitting households, as well as the industry.
Your customers can use the internet to search for the best rates, and you now use e-mail quotes to field lenders, instead of typed and faxed quote sheets.
Moreover, automated underwriting software is being increasingly employed to process a rapidly rising share of mortgage applications.
Not only does this technology reduce the time it takes to approve a mortgage application, it also offers a consistent way of evaluating applications across a number of different attributes, and helps to ensure that the downpayment and income requirements and interest rates charged more accurately reflect credit risks.
These developments enabled the industry to handle the extraordinary volume of mortgages last year with ease, especially compared to the strains that had been experienced during refinancing waves in the past.
One key benefit of the new technology has been an increased ability to manage risk.
Daily profit statements have replaced weekly ones, and rate locks with forward contracts have replaced ad hoc adjustments in the hedge portfolio.
Even though you may retain very few mortgages in your own portfolios, the practice of holding the loans for the interim period between origination and sale can expose mortgage bankers to considerable interest rate risk.
Sophisticated risk management strategies are needed, and many in your industry have spurred the creation of new technologies that allow mortgage bankers to have access to timely and accurate information on risk exposures.
In addition, these technologies facilitate the maximization of returns on the loans you originate by providing up-to-date information about the market's valuation of mortgages and about mortgage pool characteristics.
Another important development engendered by technology has been credit scoring systems that have helped to reduce uncertainty regarding future loss rates.
That, in turn, has likely lowered processing costs as well as the risk premium embedded in mortgage rates.
Notably, this technology has aided the measurement and pricing of risk on low-downpayment loans to first-time homebuyers, and has accordingly broadened the potential market for homeownership.

