For the U.S. economy, the past year has been turbulent in some respects but in the end, another year of impressive performance.
Economic growth was robust again, and unemployment and inflation edged down further.
This month marks the eighth anniversary of the last business cycle trough, and the expansion that has ensued now ranks as one of the longest.
These accomplishments are doubtless partly the result of influences that may prove transitory, but a number of fundamental strengths imply more lasting benefits.
Nonetheless, after eight years of economic expansion, the economy appears stretched in a number of dimensions, implying considerable upside and downside risks to the economic outlook.
Some industries, for example, that are more exposed to international trade have been affected adversely by the severe problems of many foreign economies, which have led both to reductions in demand from abroad and to increased competition from imports.
Agriculture has been one of the more notable soft spots, and I shall devote the bulk of my comments this morning to the situation in this sector, which has become a matter of increased concern to a good many community bankers from rural areas this past year.
Farmers, rather than sharing in the general prosperity, have been experiencing disappointing exports and sharply falling prices.
Overall, the prices received by farmers in February were about 5 percent below the level of a year earlier.
In recent weeks, corn prices have been running around $2 a bushel in the Midwest, the lowest late-winter price for that crop in a number of years.
Soybean prices, reflecting increasing world supplies and additional pressures from the Brazilian currency devaluation earlier this year, have dropped sharply to the low end of their range of the past quarter-century.
Wheat prices also have come under renewed downward pressure, even though U.S. farmers appear to be cutting back sharply on planted acreage.
Hog producers, who usually benefit from falling feed costs, instead have suffered big losses this past year, not so much from troubles on the export side as from sharply increased production; hog prices fell about two-thirds over the course of 1998, but that decline, at least, has been partially retraced in recent weeks.
By contrast, dairy prices, which have been strong over the past year, now are weakening noticeably.
The disappointing export developments and pressures on farm prices over the past few quarters can be traced to an important degree to the recession that began in Asia more than a year and a half ago and has since spread to other regions of the world.
U.S. agricultural exports to Japan, which has been experiencing its most serious downturn in a half-century, fell by more than 20 percent in value terms from 1996 to 1998.
Weakness in several other Asian economies, including Korea, Taiwan, Indonesia, and Malaysia, also engendered significant erosion in demand for U.S. farm products, and China has not proved to be the rapidly expanding market that U.S. producers had hoped to see.
All told, falling shipments to the Asian countries accounted for more than 80 percent of the drop in the value of farm exports over the past two years.
In addition, the worsening economic situation in Russia has led to reduced farm exports to that country--most notably of poultry, the exports of which previously had been growing rapidly.
In this hemisphere, shipments to Canada and Mexico have continued to expand, but exports to South American countries have slowed.
In addition to soft foreign economic activity, exchange rate effects have compounded the damping of farm exports.
Weakness in Asia and other parts of the world has particularly lowered the prices of the commodities that Canada and Australia produce in quantity, and the currencies of those countries accordingly have declined against the dollar.
Because Canada and Australia are such large factors in the international wheat market, their weakened currencies have put additional competitive pressure on some of our exporters.
The volume of our grain exports has declined, and sharply lower prices have been required to move that volume.
Meanwhile, the very strong growth of our domestic economy has contributed in only a limited way to the expansion of demand for farm products.
Consumers, especially in affluent economies, do not boost spending on food to nearly the same degree that their incomes rise.
In this country--for quite a number of years--real consumer expenditures for food have been trending up at a pace only a little faster than what might have occurred from population growth alone.
This limited potential for expansion of domestic demand--even in an economy as strong as we have experienced over the past few years--explains why the farm sector is so critically dependent on demand from abroad.
No one can predict with much confidence exactly when recoveries in demand will take hold in the troubled foreign economies.
But clearly our farm sector stands to gain, perhaps appreciably, when more favorable economic conditions finally emerge.
In the interim, farmers will likely be turning even more intensely to what has been, in the past, the one tried-and-true formula for maintaining profitability--reducing the costs of production to the bare bone.
For those farms that are the hardest pressed during the current period of slack demand from abroad, small efficiencies can mean the difference between survival and failure.
Farm businesses that are not so hard pressed can continue to forge ahead with modernizations that will leave them better positioned once demand begins to pick up.
These changes not only will affect farm profitability over the near term but also will affect supply conditions in the industry over the longer term.
I cannot stress too much the overwhelming importance of technical change as a primary force that will likely be reshaping farm supply conditions--as it has been doing for a long time.
As a consequence of each producer's striving to become more efficient and thereby to contain costs, successive waves of innovation have swept through the farm sector over the decades.
Crop producers, in stages, have implemented increased mechanization, heavier uses of fertilizers, new higher-yielding varieties of seeds, low-tillage methods of production that have enabled producers to economize on energy inputs, and heavier reliance on chemicals and pesticides to reduce crop losses.
The payoff to these efforts is evident in gains in national average yields per acre of roughly 40 percent to 60 percent for our major field crops--corn, wheat, soybeans, and cotton--over the past three decades.
Livestock productivity also has moved up: The nation has a smaller cattle herd than it did three decades ago, but beef production has risen more than 20 percent.
The dairy herd is about three-fourths the size it was in the late 1960s, but output of milk has increased more than one-third.
In the poultry business, the flock of hens has changed little, on net, but the poundage of broilers delivered to retail has risen spectacularly.
Pork production in 1998 was up close to 50 percent from that of three decades ago, even though the inventory of hogs and pigs on the nation's farms was up only slightly.
Over time, livestock producers have been able to exert greater control at all stages of production.
Increased application of industrial methods has proved especially advantageous in several of these sectors.
These technical advances have added up to a huge increase in the productivity of farmers and farm workers.
Over the past thirty years, farm value-added per hour worked has grown at an average rate of more than 4-1/2 percent, roughly three times the rate of increase in output per hour in the nonfarm business sector of our economy.
With the demand for farm output rising less than half as fast as productivity growth, the amount of labor input in agriculture has contracted dramatically.
At the same time, the faster rate of farm productivity growth has led to a sustained decline in the prices of farm products relative to nonfarm business prices, at a compound average rate of roughly 3 percent per year over the past three decades.
Still further technological advances appear to be coming on line in farming or are waiting closely in the wings.
In agriculture, as everywhere else in our economy, the computer is coming into wider use, as are other new electronic and communications devices.
Moreover, some promising applications of new technologies are more farm specific.
Combinations of electronic sensors, computers, and communications equipment are starting to give producers more control over farming operations that have always been vulnerable to pests or subject to the whims of nature.
Applications of biotechnology have taken hold already in some parts of farming, and numerous new possibilities seem to be opening up.
To be sure, many of the applications of these or other new technologies are still either in their infancy or in an early stage of adoption into standard farming practices, and some have yet to prove their commercial viability.
But the general direction of change is clearly toward more precision and control of farm production processes.
Over time, those changes surely will lead to a further lowering of real production costs as well.
For the most part, the successive waves of technical innovation have tended to give farmers who are able to reduce costs the most a leg up in expanding their operations.
These low-cost farmers are the ones best positioned to acquire additional acreage or finance the investments that can foster still further reductions in unit costs.
Over time, farms thereby become fewer in number but are larger and, in most cases, more efficient, with strengthened ties to nonfarm businesses that supply inputs that are essential to improved technologies.
The new technologies seem destined to integrate farming operations still more tightly into our complex modern economy.
This increased integration does not necessarily impinge on family farming as a way of life, but it does alter the image of the independent farmer that remains so deeply rooted in the American psyche, even as the percentage of our labor force that is engaged in farming has fallen from more than 35 percent a century ago to a little less than 2-1/2 percent today.
Farm cost containment depends not only on technical efficiency but also on the prices of inputs, which farmers do not control.
Fortunately, however, inflation is not a problem with which farmers have had to contend of late.
This past year, in fact, farmers have benefited from declining input prices that have partly relieved the pressures imposed by declines in the prices of their output.
Prices are lower for gasoline, diesel fuel, fertilizers, and farm chemicals.
Prices of many other production inputs--including vehicles, farm machinery, and farm building materials--have either held steady or risen only modestly.
Prices paid in February for all production inputs, including those purchased from other farmers, were about 3 percent below the level of a year earlier.
The weakening of farm markets, while pressuring farm income and wealth, has not had effects as dramatic as the declines in market prices might seem to have implied.
Partly because of increased government payments to farmers this past year, but also because of efficiency gains and real cost reductions that have been implemented over the past several years, net farm income and farm cash flow from operations are holding up considerably better than they otherwise would have.
Indeed, an earlier string of prosperous years fostered a strengthening of farm balance sheets, and, despite the softening of land prices in some regions since the middle part of last year, aggregate farm debt remains quite low relative to farm assets.
However, the range of financial circumstances across individual farming operations is considerable, and although producers in general appear to have remained profitable, some producers, plagued by higher costs or adverse weather, are having to make financial adjustments.
The severity of those adjustments are compounded for producers who are more heavily dependent on debt.
In some cases, farmers and farm lenders are reworking loan-repayment schedules or taking other steps to help producers get through what presumably is a transitory--though by no means abbreviated--period of softness in the demand for farm products.
Even when export demand improves, some producers may find it a struggle to stay competitive with farmers whose real costs per unit of output are being pushed ever lower by technical advance and innovation.
On the whole, commercial banks that are active in farm lending appear to have suffered little or no diminution of their profits this past year because of the increased difficulties in farming.
For the most part, farmers seem to have been able to maintain repayment of their bank loans on a timely basis, and the charge-offs of farm loans by commercial banks have remained low relative to the total volume of farm loans at these institutions.
These favorable readings, however, may be partly a reflection of the tendency for evidence of loan difficulties to lag behind the changes in farm market conditions, and some weakening of the financial indicators would not be altogether surprising as we move ahead.
Nonetheless, the banks that are more heavily involved in farm lending are, by and large, well capitalized and seemingly better positioned to absorb financial adversities from the farm sector than was the case at the start of the 1980s, at the onset of that decade's farm financial crisis.
The Farm Credit System, too, seems to be on sounder footing than it was at the start of the 1980s.
Credit from these and other lenders appears to be available to most farm borrowers at present, although the terms and standards of loans may be tightening in some cases.
Despite heightened anxieties about how long the present slack conditions in farm markets might persist, both farmers and lenders appear to retain a fair degree of optimism about the longer-run prospects for the sector, apparently owing to the expectations that technical change will create new markets for farm products and that further advances in productivity and cost reduction will help the lower-cost producers retain a competitive position in world markets.
At the same time, however, the near-term may be challenging for farmers and their lenders, especially if farm prices remain depressed, and the technical changes that will be helping innovative producers may even add to the stresses being felt by higher-cost producers.
The magnitude of the forces now at work--which bring major uncertainties for producers both from the demand side and the supply side--suggest that the financial situation in the sector may need to be monitored even more carefully than usual as we move ahead.
Additionally, I would like to note that we at the Federal Reserve are often asked by representatives of troubled sectors of the economy whether their voices truly are heard in our policy proceedings.
I can assure you that they are, most notably in the reports on regional economic conditions that are a regular part of the preparations for the meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee and in reports from Reserve Bank presidents that are a regular part of the policy discussions themselves.
Monetary policy decisions, of course, must be directed toward what is deemed to be the best path for the economy as a whole.
In today's integrated national markets, the Fed can no longer have different monetary policies for different Federal Reserve Districts as was the case in our very early years.
Quite apart from the attention that various sectors of the economy get in our deliberations on monetary policy, the Federal Reserve's responsibility in monitoring the safety and soundness of the banking system requires us to seek better understanding of the regional and sectoral composition of changes in prices and activity and of their effects on finance.
Among other things, we have devoted special attention over the years to the collection and interpretation of data from community banks that are heavily involved in agricultural lending, a sector of the economy in which these smaller banks still appear to have a strong comparative advantage.
I might note, too, that just a few months ago the Federal Reserve System's commitment to better understanding of the economic and financial conditions in rural parts of the nation was reaffirmed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's creation of a new research unit, the Center for the Study of Rural America.
In closing let me say just a few words on financial modernization legislation now before the Congress.
A broad consensus has finally arisen in this country that the vast changes in financial innovation currently in train necessitate a structure of supervision that will enable our financial institutions to progress in a safe and sound 21st century environment.
A critical choice in building that new supervisory system rests on whether the new powers granted under H.R.
10 are required to be housed in an affiliate of a holding company or are allowed to function in a subsidiary of a commercial bank.
This choice will have profound implications to the safety and soundness of American finance as we move forward.
We at the Federal Reserve believe that the new powers should be housed in holding company affiliates and thereby be financed in the marketplace at competitive costs of capital, not in an op-sub inappropriately employing subsidized safety net equity capital.
To fully empower an op-sub in our judgment would be to compromise safety and soundness of our future financial structure.

I would like to focus my remarks on some recent research the Federal Reserve has sponsored on small business finances and on related efforts we make to help maintain small business access to capital and credit.
The Role of Small Businesses in our Economy The Federal Reserve has long recognized the importance of small businesses and the access of small businesses to credit.
In part, the Federal Reserve's ongoing interest in small business credit availability and its effects on economic growth stems from the fact that small firms play such a significant role in our dynamic economy.
By some estimates, there are upwards of twenty-three million small businesses in the United States accounting for over 99 percent of all firms.
Although a great number of these firms involve individuals who are self-employed or who have only a few employees, small businesses employ, collectively, more than half of the private sector work force.
These firms also generate nearly half of the sales revenues of all U.S. firms.
Even these statistics, impressive as they are, belie the importance of small businesses in our economy.
Small firms provide the entry point into our nation's work force for about two-thirds of all workers, providing them opportunities to gain workplace skills and to learn about and apply new technologies.
Small businesses also are often at the leading edge of technological innovation, both pushing and pulling our economy in new directions.
According to the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA), for example, small businesses account for a little more than half of all the innovations in our economy and provide for nearly 30 percent of the jobs in the increasingly important high technology sector.
The current economic expansion has provided a favorable climate for small businesses generally and for minority-owned firms in particular.
In 1996 alone, nearly a million new firms began operation.
Moreover, in recent years, the number of minority-owned firms has been growing at a rate of three to four times that of other small businesses, though minority-owned firms still constitute only a small proportion of all small businesses.
As of 1993, about 12 percent of all small businesses were minority-owned; about 3 percent were black-owned, 3.5 percent Asian-owned, 4 percent Hispanic-owned and 1 percent were owned by Native Americans.
Given the importance of small businesses to our economy, and their heavy reliance on credit to facilitate growth, the Federal Reserve has taken a leading role in efforts to improve understanding of factors that bear on the availability of funds to support business activity.
We do that in two primary ways: through an active, ongoing program of data collection and research designed to help us understand credit activity and its impacts on small business; and through a comprehensive program of educational, information and technical assistance activities to help banks and their communities understand and address credit availability issues.
Research and Access to Capital and Credit Let me first address some of our data collection and research efforts.
As in other areas, much of our involvement has focused on sponsoring special surveys of both businesses and creditors and supporting basic research.
Just last week here in Washington, the Federal Reserve sponsored a major research conference on business access to capital and credit.
Sixteen original research papers were presented, touching on many aspects of small business finance.
These included the likely role newer developments such as credit scoring and securitization of business loans may have on small business lending in the future.
Much of the research presented at the conference drew on the Federal Reserve's 1993 National Survey of Small Business Finances.
This survey collected detailed information on the financial and other characteristics of a nationally representative sample of small businesses.
To help us gain a better understanding of the nature and needs of minority-owned firms, the survey over-sampled the number of firms owned by various minority groups.
I might note that we currently are well along in our preparations for another survey later this year, which will include interviews with some 6,000 small businesses.
Three papers presented in the session on access to credit for minority- and female-owned businesses provide many insights, some of which I would like to share with you.
This research documented many similarities, as well as important differences, in financial and nonfinancial characteristics between minority- and white-owned firms and between those owned by males and females.
For example, black-owned firms tend to be smaller (whether measured by assets or employees), newer, and more likely to be located in an urban area than their non-minority counterparts.
Black-owned businesses also tend to be owned by a person with fewer years of business experience and to have poorer credit histories, but they are also more likely to be owned by a person having at least some college education.
Finally, black-owned businesses are more likely to be a sole proprietorship and in the services industry.
Differences between other minority-owned firms and white-owned firms tend to be less pronounced, although differences are found.
Clearly, there are many factors considered in credit decisions.
Smaller businesses with limited equity capital, fewer assets to pledge as collateral, uncertain earnings streams, and high failure rates can reasonably be expected, on the whole, to experience greater difficulties in obtaining credit than larger firms.
The personal creditworthiness of the business owner in sole proprietorships or small partnerships, as well as in small corporations, is also an important consideration.
Creditor evaluations of risk, based on these and other legitimate economic factors, properly play a central role in credit decisions.
According to the research, minority and women-owned firms differ from white and male-owned firms, not only on some important financial and nonfinancial dimensions, but also in some of their credit market experiences.
The three papers, however, reached mixed conclusions regarding the nature and size of differences in credit market experiences.
All three papers concluded that black-owned firms were more likely to be turned down for credit.
Even in this regard results vary.
For example, in urban markets, which accounted for the vast majority of firms in the study, differences in turndown rates are less pronounced than in rural areas.
And when small retail establishments are considered separately, denial rates for black-owned and white-owned firms are similar.
Clearly, additional research will be required to more fully understand these complexities.
Determining whether and to what extent discrimination may play a role in explaining differences in the credit market experiences of small businesses owned by individuals from different demographic groups is difficult.
Our small business survey is extremely useful because it allows for the documentation of differences in credit market experiences and provides clues regarding the reasons for these differences.
However, these data can not identify all of the unique factors involved in the credit-granting decision.
Discrimination, if it does exist in any creditor's decision, is disturbing.
The moral and legal objections to discrimination are obvious.
In addition, constraints on access to credit due to discrimination carry real costs and serious economic consequences.
Such constraints inhibit economic opportunities by limiting the ability of victims to purchase homes, expand businesses, and accumulate wealth.
At its heart, discrimination in granting credit artificially restricts the flow of capital.
It means that viable economic activity goes unfunded and markets that should work do not.
I can assure you that the Federal Reserve will remain vigilant to any indications that illegal discrimination is part of credit decisions.
We, of course, continue to examine banks to measure and ensure their compliance with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
And we will continue to sponsor research that bears on issues of credit availability and constraints, including those involving potential illegal discrimination.
Information and Educational Programs In addition to our collection and analysis of data on small businesses, the Federal Reserve has also supported and supplemented its other functions with a proactive program to help banks meet key community credit needs.
Through our Community Affairs programs at each of the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, we conduct ongoing outreach, educational, and hands-on technical assistance activities designed to help banks, their customers, and communities understand and address community credit needs, including those of small businesses.
This is no small commitment.
Combined, the Federal Reserve Board and the twelve Reserve Banks devote over 100 full-time staff persons to help institutions understand and participate in the community development process.
To give you an idea of the scope of our activities, over the last three years, Federal Reserve Community Affairs staff have conducted over 4,600 outreach meetings throughout the country to discuss credit-related issues with a wide range of groups interested in community development and investment, including small businesses.
During that same period, the twelve Federal Reserve Banks sponsored over 700 educational conferences, seminars, and workshops attended by over 35,000 people, including bankers, representatives of small businesses and community-based organizations, as well as public officials, focusing on credit and investment issues.
Although some of this activity involves issues related to affordable housing and community development, over the past few years, our Community Affairs activities have increasingly focused on small business and economic development.
Here are just a few examples that took place during this past year.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston sponsored a major conference, entitled, "Making it in the Mainstream," which reviewed partnerships between minority enterprises and major corporations as a strategy for inner-city business development and job creation.
To help bankers understand the financial techniques available to assist very small and start-up businesses, several educational programs were offered.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis sponsored a conference on small business incubation, while the Atlanta Reserve Bank conducted a workshop on issues affecting microenterprise lending.
The Boston Reserve Bank developed a Microenterprise Training Curriculum, designed to provide lending and technical assistance training to organizations that offer services to micro-entrepreneurs.
And the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond conducted a series of six conferences, in conjunction with the National Association of Women Business Owners, on the subject of "Access to Capital: Start to Finish," which focused on financing needs and resources for women-owned businesses.
As an adjunct to their educational programs, the Reserve Banks provide direct technical assistance to bankers, business and community development organizations to help them identify and address capital and credit issues.
Many of our Reserve Banks have helped bankers create multi-bank community development corporations (CDCs) and other consortium lending intermediaries, which focus on equity and debt financing for small and disadvantaged businesses.
They also help banks deal with regulatory requirements that often must be addressed before investing in CDCs, Small Business Investment Companies, or multi-bank loan consortia.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, for example, worked with the Florida Black Business Investment Board and assisted banks interested in investing in regional Black Business Investment Corporations, which provide equity and loans to black-owned businesses in that state.
Throughout the country, the Federal Reserve, through its Community Affairs program, regularly works with a wide variety of small business development groups, such as the SBA, small and minority business development centers, community development corporations, and small business associations to identify small business credit issues and convene meetings with bankers to help craft solutions.
Access to Capital Initiative One promising approach is taking place in Cleveland.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland has joined forces with the Small Business Administration and the Greater Cleveland Growth Association's Council of Smaller Enterprises (COSE) to fund and coordinate a community-wide effort to improve capital access for the Northeast Ohio small businesses.
The Initiative was created to help narrow the gap between the need for and the availability of start-up and expansion capital for new and growing businesses.
Research had indicated that over a five-year period an average of 5,800 businesses failed each year in the eight-county region of Northeast Ohio, often for lack of sufficient capital at start-up and during key growth phases.
To address capital availability issues, the Initiative's strategy was to engage broad participation from capital providers, business owners, small business support organizations, and legal and accounting professionals both to help identify and shape issues, and to develop solutions.
A representative planning committee was formed to help guide the process.
Its roles were to identify issues, select people to serve on work teams, review work team recommendations, and champion the new capital access system strategy that was to emerge.
A meeting of over 175 bankers, representatives of small business finance intermediaries, venture capitalists, accountants, attorneys, public officials, and small business owners developed a series of recommendations and action plans.
The process in Cleveland is continuing and the Federal Reserve continues to play a key role in helping convene meetings and move the process forward.
In a related effort this past year, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago began the initial phases of its "Small Business Credit Access Initiative" which will identify and address barriers to equity and debt capital for small enterprises in the Chicago metropolitan area, especially those businesses located in predominately minority and low-income communities.
Conclusion Let me conclude by reemphasizing that the Federal Reserve employs many tools that help us understand credit markets, and address credit and capital availability issues confronting small businesses.
Through effective monetary policy, our goal is to help maintain price stability and sustain conditions for growth that provide continuing opportunities for small businesses to flourish.

