Will our economy go on performing so splendidly into the next millennium or will the good times come to an end sometime soon?
Indeed, the economic journalists' most frequent question these days is some variant of: "How long will it last?"
"Is the good news temporary or permanent?"
I get this question all the time, as do all members of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Hope springs eternal that we may be privy to some secret economic clues available only to readers of entrails inside the temple.
Unfortunately, of course, we process the same economic information available to everyone else and face the same uncertainties.
I don't know the answer to how long the good times will roll, and I don't know any responsible person who claims to know.
Indeed, I think it's a silly question.
So I'd like to formulate a more important query, one that I think has more operational significance.
The operational question is this: Given what we know--or think we know--about why the economy might be performing so extraordinarily effectively, what can we all do that will likely help to keep the good news flowing?
Answering this question will require: (1) sorting out the list of factors that appear to be contributing to the good performance into those we may be able to control or influence and those we can't; (2) doing everything we can to influence the controllable factors so that we maximize the chances that the good performance continues.
By "we" I don't just mean the Federal Reserve, although the Fed has a role to play.
I mean everyone in this room and people like you in all parts of the country.
We all make economic policy decisions at the household, business, community or governmental level, directly and through our actions, and influence as consumers, investors, producers and voters.
Sustaining the high performance of the economy depends much more on what people in Minnesota do--along with those in Maine and Louisiana and Oregon--than it does on monetary policy.
What do we mean when we say the economy is performing well?
The statistics usually cited are the growth rate of gross national product, the unemployment rate and the rate of inflation (for which there exist several different measures).
All of these statistics have been coming up roses for some time--simultaneously.
The GDP (in real terms, after inflation) has been growing continuously for eight years and this long expansion, instead of petering out, has accelerated in the last couple of years.
Real GDP grew about 4.5 percent in the first quarter of this year and has grown about 4 percent a year for the last two years, despite the negative impact of the world financial crisis that began in Asia in early 1997.
Millions of new jobs have been created in the last few years; and unemployment, now at 4.3 percent, has been at or below 5 percent for over two years.
Not long ago, most economists thought growth this rapid and unemployment this low would inevitably produce inflation.
However, inflation has remained remarkably subdued, and, indeed has continued to decline over the last several years.
All of this means rising standards of living and greater economic security for most Americans.
Moreover, the strength of the economy has been spread broadly across all regions of the country.
A few areas with deep-seated economic problems, such as Northern Minnesota, still lag, and parts of agriculture are suffering severely from the downward pressure of weak world demand on commodity prices, but growth in other sectors has taken up much of the slack.
Low inflation has reduced expectations of inflation, lowered long-term interest rates, encouraged investment and housing and made planning ahead easier for everyone.
Moreover, in the last couple of years, one of the discouraging aspects of this long expansion finally seems to be reversing.
Through 1996, the benefits of rising prosperity were flowing to those with skill and education, people already doing relatively well.
Those at the low end of the skill and income ladder were falling further behind.
Recently, however, very tight labor markets have meant that even unskilled and less educated workers have enjoyed higher real earnings, poverty rates have begun to decline, and even the bottom 20 percent of households have had a significant increase in their standard of living for a change.
The high performance of the economy does not just mean more material possessions for most people, although it certainly does mean that.
It also means more enjoyment of and support for the creative side of life--art, music, theatre, dance--and more public resources for improving streets, parks and schools, cleaning up pollution and preserving natural beauty.
The City of Chicago, for example, is putting $2 billion into renovating its crumbling schools.
Perhaps most important, strong growth and tight labor markets have opened opportunities for workers at all levels--opportunities to move up, to get better jobs, to get off welfare, to go back to school with less fear of being unable to find jobs on completion.
And it isn't just the United States that benefits from our prosperity--indeed, the vibrant American economy is contributing mightily to the revival of growth in what would otherwise be a weak global economy.
Asia is only beginning the process of recovery from the deep recession that followed the financial crisis of 1997, and the hoped-for engine of Asian recovery--the huge Japanese economy--remains stalled.
Much of Latin America is in recession as a result of the Brazilian financial crisis and low commodity prices; Russia is struggling and exporting its troubles to its trading partners; even Western Europe, affected by all of the above, is growing far more slowly than we are.
When Americans are prosperous, we spend an increasing portion of our rising incomes on imports.
Without the income generated by exporting to us, many other countries would be in much worse shape than they actually are.
In the long run, the rapid accumulation of obligations to foreigners, which pays for our excess of imports over exports, cannot be sustained.
In the meantime, however, we are financing some of our boom-times by borrowing the savings of foreigners, and they are benefiting by exporting to us.
A slowdown in the U.S. economy would reduce our trade and current account deficits, but make it harder for the rest of the world to recover.
The bottom line is, billions of people, not just us, benefit from the high performance of the U.S. economy, so what can we do to keep it functioning so well?
The key conundrum is how we have managed to have such strong growth and associated tight labor markets, with subdued, even declining, inflation.
Some of the credit clearly goes to global forces that Americans don't control and which can't be counted on to continue pushing in the same direction forever.
The world financial crisis has weakened demand for internationally traded goods, especially commodities, including agricultural products, metals, and oil (although the oil price has come back up recently as producing countries cut supply).
In the face of weak demand, world prices of just about everything tradable are low and competition is fierce.
At the same time, the U.S. dollar has been strong, especially in relation to currencies of emerging market countries.
In part, the strength of the dollar reflects the fact that our economy has been performing so well and has offered international investors profitable opportunities along with a safe haven from political and financial turmoil.
The strong dollar has made imports cheap and has helped keep inflation low-to the benefit of U.S. consumers and the distress of some U.S. producers.
We can't count on low world commodity prices or a strong dollar continuing far into the future, and both have their downsides for us and for others.
Some features of the global economy, however, seem likely to endure.
The events of the last two years come on top of a huge expansion of global trade, competition and productive capacity--all of which have given American businesses less control over prices in the face of rising costs and benefited American consumers through low prices.
Moreover, although we often think of "global competition" as being associated with internationally traded goods, many of the same forces that have made the global marketplace increasingly competitive--especially faster, cheaper transportation and the revolutionary changes in communications and information management--also operate to make domestic markets broader and more competitive.
As buying, selling, and comparing prices at a distance has become easier, producers of all kinds of goods and services have found themselves in a more competitive environment with less independent pricing power than they used to have.
The increasing competitiveness of the U.S. economy--and that of the rest of the world--seems likely to continue to reduce inflationary tendencies in the future.
Further deregulation would foster this competitiveness, as would further lowering of trade barriers.
Conversely, reregulation or a relapse into protectionism would tend to negate the procompetitive and anti-inflationary trend.
Fierce national and international competition has its cost in uncertainty, disruption of lives and settled patterns.
It demands flexibility and adaptability of businesses, workers and communities.
It requires a willingness of workers to learn new skills, to take chances, to move to new jobs and new places.
It requires nimbleness, flexibility and risk taking on the part of business.
It requires communities to be adaptable, to make efforts (not all of which will be successful) to diversify their economic bases and to attract new jobs and residents when existing ones move on.
It requires government to be imaginative and creative (words we don't always associate with government) in designing transition assistance for workers and communities that will provide incentives to change and adapt, rather than incentives to remain stuck in the status quo.
Strong growth and tight labor markets reduce the likely cost of taking chances for workers, businesses and communities.
But change is hard and not everyone is willing or able to pay the price.
One of the determinants of how long the U.S. economy can continue to perform at a high level with low inflation is how well we all learn to adapt to the changes that go with the increased competitiveness of the national and international marketplace that is helping to keep our economy growing and inflation low.
An important part of the answer to why the U.S. economy has been able to grow so strongly without inflation accelerating has been the recent resurgence in productivity growth.
Productivity grew strongly from the end of World War II into the early 1970s, accounting for the rapid increase in American's real incomes over that period.
Then, around the time of the first oil shock in the early 1970s, productivity growth slowed drastically both here and in other industrial countries, remaining weak in the U.S. through the 1980s and first half of the 1990s.
Average growth in output per hour in non-farm business was only a little over 1 percent between 1973 and 1995.
In the last three years, however, productivity growth has accelerated, reaching an astonishing 4 percent growth in the last two quarters.
The growth in productivity has enabled business to pay higher wages without raising prices significantly or eroding profits severely.
Is the increase in productivity a temporary cyclical response to strong growth or does it presage an upward shift in the productivity growth trend that will make it easier going forward to continue strong growth, rising real incomes and low inflation?
That's another one of those silly questions to which no one can honestly claim to know the answer.
Hypotheses abound about why productivity growth might have accelerated in the mid 1990s.
Technology clearly has something to do with it.
Although the telecommunications and information management revolution did not start in the 1990s, it may have been just at the right point by then to offer firms that are facing strong demand and tight labor markets a way to increase their efficiency.
In the past, when unemployment remained low for an extended period, economists expected productivity to suffer because firms were forced to hire less skilled workers with less experience--workers whose productivity was likely to be low.
However, recent experience suggests--but certainly does not yet prove--that two factors may have combined to change the expected impact of tight labor markets on productivity.
One factor is the availability of new technology, especially computers and telecommunications technology.
The other factor is the revolution in management attitudes and practices that has occurred since the 1980s.
A whole generation of managers has been trained to think continuously about productivity and quality management.
Buzzwords like reengineering and restructuring have not only gotten into the vocabulary of managers, but they have also infiltrated their thought processes and affected their behavior.
The response of many firms to shortages of skilled workers and to foreign competition has apparently been to reorganize what they were doing and how they were doing it, substituting efficient new equipment for employees, training workers to use new equipment and techniques, and outsourcing to reduce costs.
All of these have combined to increase productivity.
If this hypothesis is right--or even partly right--then there are actions that many different kinds of economic actors can take to help keep a good thing going.
Workers and potential workers can acquire more skills and more education at all levels.
They can take the risk of moving to new and better jobs or starting new businesses.
Companies can keep their focus on cutting costs and increasing productivity; they can foster research and innovation; they can offer training and employee incentives to acquire more education and skills.
Colleges and universities, community colleges and technical institutes can offer courses at times and in places convenient for workers, for "non-traditional" students as well as traditional ones.
They can put less emphasis on standard degrees and more on courses designed to help students acquire not just job skills, but the broader education that helps them to become more adaptable and to acquire the intellectual self confidence that helps them deal with change.
Communities, large and small, can make efforts to diversity their economic bases, upgrade and modernize their school systems, and welcome new kinds of workers and companies.
Governments can support the basic research from which applications and innovations flow, and offer incentives to education and training and financial aid for students.
Financial institutions can offer attractive convenient ways for individuals to save and invest.
They can take chances on new ideas, new clienteles, and innovative companies--subject to sound risk management, of course.
All levels of government can manage their finances prudently, provide public services efficiently, build up surpluses and rainy day funds and pay down debt.
This kind of behavior will result in government adding to the national saving rate and enhancing the chances of future growth, rather than subtracting from national saving by running public deficits.
It is especially important to use the current and projected federal budget surplus to reduce the federal debt.
The President's budget and social security proposal would have this effect.
Finally, the Federal Reserve can continue trying, as we have been doing, to balance the risk of allowing the economy to grow too fast for its own long-run good and begin a growth-threatening acceleration of inflation against the other risk that the economy will slowdown too much in the near term and lose the benefits of healthy labor markets and sustainable growth.

Economic literacy happens to be one of my favorite causes.
I'm very pleased, both personally and on behalf of the Federal Reserve Board, to associate myself enthusiastically with the efforts of all the participants in the symposium who have come together from different places to think about how to improve the ability of Americans to understand and deal with basic economic issues.
There are two senses in which increasing economic literacy contributes greatly to the functioning of our society.
First, a free market economy works well only when the participants--producers, consumers, savers, investors--have the information they need to make intelligent decisions.
People need to understand what banks do and how to deal with them; how insurance works and how to think about how much they need; why saving is important and what instruments are available for saving; what investing means, how to do it and what the risks are; and the concept of investing in themselves and how to get a good job.
Most important, participants in the economy need to know how to think about the economic choices they face and how to get the information they need to make intelligent decisions.
Second, democracy works well only when citizens participate, vote and make their views known to public officials.
In this respect, we seem to be living with a paradox.
On the one hand, the revolution in communications means that citizens have access to far more information on public issues than ever before.
Radio, television and the Internet are inundating all of us with news, analysis, opinions and debate on public issues, large and small.
Citizens have more education and more ways of communicating their views to public officials than they had in the past.
They can write, call, visit or e-mail their members of Congress or their state or local legislative representative.
Indeed, members are flooded with constituent views.
Citizen opinions are constantly being sought in polls or on talk radio.
On the other hand, public issues, especially economic issues, seem to have gotten more complex and harder to understand.
Globalization and rapid advances in technology mean that events in remote parts of the world that we do not know much about can affect economic life in the United States and vice versa.
Markets in distant places are intimately interrelated; huge amounts of money move around the world in seconds.
The interactions and interrelations of markets and economic institutions in different parts of the globe are complex and unpredictable.
But even at home, public issues appear to have gotten more difficult for the average person to understand.
It may be partly because we solved a lot of the easy problems, and they left harder ones in their wake.
Whether or not the government should provide health insurance for people over 65, for example, was a relatively straightforward problem, although emotions ran high on both sides.
How to finance and administer the Medicare program, so that it provides adequate coverage at containable cost is a lot more complex and intellectually demanding issue.
Adding to the complexity of the issues is the fact that we now have a whole new class of experts, sometimes known as policy wonks, with charts and equations, statistics and data sets, models and printouts.
These people--and I freely admit to being one of them--have higher degrees from our best universities.
They are supposed to be helping decision-makers and the public understand issues better and make more intelligent decisions.
But they often talk in a jargon-filled specialized language of their own and sometimes seem more concerned with impressing each other on talk shows, at legislative hearings or in public forums, than with enlightening the public.
Rather than simplifying the decisions, the chatter of the talking heads often seems to make issues seem even more complex and hard to get a handle on than they really are.
The combination of overwhelming quantities of information, the increasing complexity of the issues and the tech-speak of the policy wonks constitutes the fundamental challenge to economic education.
Without a basic understanding of how the economy works, what the essential terms and concepts are, the average citizen is likely to feel completely left out of any conversation, whether in the media or around the water cooler, about what is happening in the economy and what to do about it.
Feeling left out is frustrating and alienating.
If talk is unintelligible--if the listener is without keys or clues or a basic framework into which to fit what is being said--then it is natural for the listener to tune out and to feel powerless, ill-used, manipulated and even feel that something sinister or nefarious must be going on from which he is being intentionally excluded.
In order to feel included and empowered, a citizen needs to have a basic understanding of how the world works--in this case how the economic world works--that will provide a basis for asking pertinent questions, obtaining more information and eventually figuring out what the issues are all about and what ought to be done.
Economic literacy is akin to having a working knowledge of a foreign language.
If you are with a group of foreigners and don't speak their language at all, especially if its sounds and intonations are strange and unfamiliar to your ears, you tune out.
You feel excluded, perhaps uneasy.
If you have a rudimentary working knowledge of the language, you can at least follow the drift of the conversation, ask a few questions and feel that, even if you are not getting the fine points, you are not totally left out and you have a basis for acquiring more knowledge.
That, it seems to me, is what economic literacy means--a rudimentary working knowledge of the concepts and language of economic activity and economic policy.
I said the language of economic activity and policy, rather than the language of "economics."
I make the distinction because the word "economics" suggests the academic discipline taught in colleges and universities.
That discipline, I am afraid, has become so abstract, so obsessed with mathematical modeling of an unreal world where economic actors have perfect knowledge and unambiguous profit-seeking motives, that it frequently does not have obvious relevance to what average citizens need to understand about economic activity and economic policy choices.
The teaching of economic literacy does not mean teaching a dumbed-down version of a graduate economic theory course.
It's harder than that.
It means starting from the complex ambiguous real world that we all find ourselves in (whether as producers, consumers, savers, investors or economic policy makers), figuring out the basic concepts that people need to grasp in order to function and feel empowered in that real world, and then helping them learn a rudimentary working knowledge of that language.
I have long been impressed with the ability of quite young children to grasp ideas about buying and selling, saving and investing and even basic ideas of how economic policy works.
Economic literacy ought to start in kindergarten and continue right through primary and secondary school.
I have also long been impressed by the power of role-playing as a teaching tool.
I was delighted when I came to the Fed to discover that we sponsor "the Fed Challenge"--a contest for high schools with which many of you are doubtless familiar.
Teams of high school students assume the roles of members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and debate current monetary policy.
The finalists in the contest get to come to Washington and hold their monetary policy debate around the actual Board room table where the real FOMC gathers eight times a year.
I have been a judge for this contest twice and enjoyed it enormously.
As I told the students, in all honesty, their discussion was every bit as informed and insightful as the real meetings of the FOMC.
If we turned monetary policy over to the winners of the Fed Challenge, the real FOMC could retire and the nation's economy would be no worse off.
I am also convinced that if the schools do a good job of teaching economic literacy and the businesses, banks, unions, and governmental institutions lend their support and help further the economic literacy of their employees, members, customers and clients, then not only will the economy work better, but economic policy will be better informed and more effective.
Even policymakers need help.
Years ago when I first went to Capitol Hill to direct the newly established Congressional Budget Office, a group of freshman members of Congress came to me and said, in a sort of embarrassed whisper and out of earshot of more senior members, that they found themselves mystified by the federal budget and all this talk about deficits and debt, appropriations and authorizations, effective tax rates, multipliers and fiscal policy.
Was there any way, they whispered, that I could arrange a course that would help them understand what they needed to vote about.
I agreed, and recruited a couple of policy economists that I knew to be excellent teachers.
We had several sessions and had quite a good time.
A few years later, in the '80s, when mounting federal budget deficits were an urgent problem, the Committee for A Responsible Federal Budget launched "A Exercise in Hard Choices," in which groups of people in various parts of the country gathered around tables and actually tried to balance the federal budget by cutting specific programs and raising particular taxes.
The participants learned a lot about how hard the choices really are.
The exercise shook up a lot of people who had been saying, "Oh, those idiots in Washington, why don't they just balance the budget by cutting out all that government waste."
They discovered that there isn't a line-item in the budget called "wasteful programs."
One person's wasteful program is another's high priority.
We also did the "exercise in hard choices" with a group of Congressmen and Senators, fairly senior ones, as I remember.
They also learned a lot, believe it or not.
Members who were not on the budget committees had their own areas of expertise depending on their subcommittee jurisdiction, but they had not looked at the whole budget and tried to make the spending and revenue sides balance.
They, too, learned how hard it was.
This type of experience has brought home to me, not only the learning value of role playing, but the importance of getting students involved in actually making economic choices and not just hearing people talk about them.
And then there is the role of the media, which, it seems to me, could do a lot better in furthering the cause of economic literacy and possibly even build their audience in the process.
One problem is the presentation of the statistic of the day on, say, the evening news.
The audience learns that the Consumer Price Index went up .4 percent or that housing starts went down, but is given no context into which to fit the information.
The weather reporters do better.
Their audience can watch storms developing, temperatures rising or falling.
There's a map that puts the isolated statistics into contexts and allows the audience to see the patterns develop.
The economic reporters have no economic map on which to show the audience how the economic patterns are developing.
The assumption is that the audience would tune out.
I'm not so sure; pocketbook issues rank right up there with the weather in importance to people.
Another problem with TV economics is the persistent view that what people want is controversy between two sides (always two, never three) of an issue, and hence that the best way to enlighten the public is to get two talking heads with extreme opposite views to shout at each other.
Maybe people like that style--I don't--but I don't think they learn much that helps them or their elected representatives craft more moderate, constructive solutions that might command a consensus.
In sum, my view is: Increasing economic literacy is important to the functioning of the economy itself and in making better informed economic policy in our democracy.
We don't do a very good job now--on the average.
There are lots of good techniques available to increase economic literacy, especially role-playing about economic choices, public and private.
The technology would allow more effective daily economic education, especially on TV and over the Internet.

