But lately both academic economists and central bankers have become enamored of a new procedure that may have more staying power than these other approaches and that has certainly been more widely adopted around the world.
Called inflation targeting, this new procedure essentially commits a country's central bank to hit an inflation target, usually expressed as a low, positive rate of inflation subject to some margin of error and some allowance for outside price shocks.
New Zealand was the first country to adopt a formal inflation targeting regime back in 1990.
It was soon followed by Canada, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and Australia.
The European Central Bank at least alludes to inflation targeting in its strategy statements, as do many countries in eastern Europe that aspire to join the European Union.
At least ten emerging-market countries have adopted inflation targeting as a way to correct persistent inflation problems.
In the last few months alone, Turkey, Switzerland, and South Africa have announced that they are switching to inflation targeting.
When tallied up, the number of countries on either a formal or an informal inflation-targeting regime now approaches thirty.
Perhaps more meaningfully, there seems to be no country that has first tried inflation targeting and then abandoned it.
One apparent holdout is the United States.
While U.S. central bankers have often stressed the paramount importance of controlling inflation, the United States has never adopted a formal inflation target or an inflation-targeting regime.
The Federal Reserve operates under the Federal Reserve Act, which requires the Fed to try to achieve maximum employment along with price stability.
But both in the academic community and in the halls of the Congress, there are advocates for change.
In a series of articles and books, Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, and Posen (1999) have proposed that the United States adopt an explicit inflation-targeting regime.
Senator Connie Mack has introduced a bill to this effect in the Congress, so far not adopted.
Recognizing that the question of whether the United States should adopt inflation targeting is ultimately a congressional prerogative, one could still ask the normative question of whether the United States should go to inflation targeting.
The question is difficult to answer.
While inflation targeting seems to have been successful around the world, the preconditions for success may not be relevant for this country.
Given the strong U.S. commitment to controlling inflation, in the end there may be little difference between the way monetary policy already is practiced in the United States and the way it is practiced under the flexible, forward-looking inflation-targeting regimes followed by many countries.
Finally, although one can find economic circumstances in which inflation targeting will work well, it is also possible to imagine circumstances in which even forward-looking, flexible inflation targeting may not work so well, some of these circumstances from the fairly recent past of the United States.
Basic Aspects of Inflation Targeting Describing an inflation-targeting regime is straightforward.
A country or its central bank commits to controlling inflation, with an explicit target rate and usually a tolerance band around this target rate.
Obvious price shocks such as indirect taxes, commodity prices, or interest rates themselves are usually excluded in the calculation of inflation targets.
Many inflation-targeting regimes permit flexibility for pursuing other goals, such as output stabilization, though the primary commitment of the central bank is clearly to control inflation.
Given the lags in monetary policy, many regimes also are forward-looking, in the sense that the central bank operates not against current inflation but expected inflation in the near future.
Three rationales normally are given for the adoption of inflation-targeting regimes: The provision of a nominal anchor for policy, transparency, and credibility.
A nominal anchor may be required if countries permit their exchange rates to vary and if they do not target either the growth of monetary quantities or nominal income.
Governments or their central banks may need such an anchor to stabilize inflation, and they can generate the anchor by announcing an inflation target and then doing what they must do to hit that target.
Such an approach would also lead to more transparent monetary policies, as economic actors would better understand the goals of monetary authorities.
To the extent that monetary authorities can hit their target, central banks would also gain credibility, which many need after years of inflation.
The ideals of transparency and credibility certainly have democratic value in their own right, but they may also pay off in narrower economic terms.
It is commonly argued that inflationary expectations are a key aspect of the inflation process.
In lowering inflationary expectations, inflation targeting can itself help reduce inflationary pressures.
One can also rationalize inflation targeting through another form of economic reasoning.
Some years ago many believed, along with Milton Friedman, that stabilizing the growth of the money supply would lead to stable prices.
But this approach is now generally discredited because shocks in the demand for money and an unstable transmission mechanism imply that stable growth of monetary aggregates could lead to quite unstable behavior for prices and real incomes.
The next step was to follow Bennett McCallum (1988) and avoid inappropriate responses to shocks in the demand for money by having the central bank simply stabilize nominal income growth.
But again, if there were shocks in this nominal income growth, say productivity shocks, stabilizing nominal income growth would not necessarily stabilize prices.
The same productivity shocks have led to difficulties with the instrument rule proposed by John Taylor (1993), which requires either a predictable rate of growth of potential output or a predictable natural rate of unemployment.
As these other procedures for conducting monetary policy have run into difficulty, academic economists have increasingly drifted to the straightforward view of Bernanke, Laubach, Mishkin, Posen and many others that, if central banks want to stabilize prices, they should just do that by inflation targeting.
But the migration of academic economists to inflation targeting is nothing compared with the migration of actual real world countries to inflation targeting.
The earliest and still most elaborate procedures were adopted by New Zealand, where the parliamentary government in 1990 began negotiating inflation targets with its newly independent central bank, making these targets public, and holding the bank responsible for hitting the targets.
Other regimes came later and were less elaborate, but by now a great many countries have regimes in which they publish inflation targets, have the central bank commit to meeting these targets, and comment on the progress in meeting the targets.
Because all central banks in the world are responsible for controlling inflation, it is reasonable to ask how explicit inflation-targeting regimes differ from non-targeting regimes.
From a legislative standpoint, the differences seem reasonably clear.
Inflation-targeting regimes have explicit inflation targets, explicit commitments of the central bank to meet these targets, and less formal commitments to achieve other goals, such as output stabilization.
But from a practical standpoint, the differences could be much less distinct.
On one side, even non-targeting countries often will be strongly committed to controlling inflation.
On the other side, countries that target inflation flexibly and in a forward-looking manner may also strive to reduce output variability, perhaps because it helps to stabilize future inflation.
As will be discussed below, an empirical analysis by Cecchetti and Ehrmann (1999) does not find large differences in actual policy parameters between the two sets of countries.
All existing inflation targets around the world are for low, positive rates of inflation.
For developed countries with stable inflation rates, the world average target rate of inflation is around 2 percent, with an acceptable band that normally ranges from 1 to 3 percent.
Target levels are higher, but are promised to be stepped down gradually over time, for emerging-market countries that are trying to bring inflation down from very high levels.
There is academic interest in targeting future price levels as opposed to inflation rates.
The two approaches differ mainly in their response to past errors: Is the central bank to be held responsible for offsetting these past errors and getting the price level back on track or just for stabilizing inflation from this time forward?
But in practice this distinction may not be that important.
King (1999) shows that, if a long enough interval is given to hit the target, there may be little difference between a price level target and an inflation rate target.
In any event, no country now targets the future price level.
However, there could be an important difference between a target of a low positive rate of inflation and one of a zero rate of inflation.
Many potential inflation targeters ask, "Why not zero?"
There are three reasons for targeting for an inflation rate above zero.
The first is measurement bias.
Try as they might, most countries do have some bias in their price indexes.
It is hard for governmental statistical agencies to eliminate the measurement bias that occurs whenever new and improved goods are introduced to consumers, and new and improved goods are continually being introduced.
It is also hard to deal with substitution bias by updating the weights on various consumer goods.
Measurement bias is not huge around the world, and it is coming down as statistical agencies adopt new and improved statistical procedures.
But there may still be some irreducible upward bias in measuring inflation.
The second reason for shooting at a rate of inflation slightly above zero is known as the zero bound problem.
If a country's real interest rates are close to zero and its inflation rate is close to zero, its nominal interest rates will also be close to zero.
Since costs of holding cash are minimal, a central bank cannot push nominal interest rates much below zero.
This means that countries that target for zero inflation could get in the bind of being unable to ease monetary policy in response to recessionary shocks.
Today this issue is not much of a problem around most of the world, but it has become a significant problem in Japan.
The balance of economic thought on the issue is that, once a country gets into this zero bound situation, it has a very difficult time getting out.
This forms a strong rationale for avoiding the danger in the first place, which can be helped by targeting for a low positive rate of inflation.
The third reason for targeting a low positive rate of inflation is labor market inefficiencies.
Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996) argue that these can be lessened with some positive inflation.
Essentially, employers can be spared the necessity of cutting workers' nominal wage when these workers' productivity falls below their real wage.
While Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry make an empirical case for their views, others find little evidence that labor markets become less efficient when inflation drops to very low levels.
While economists are still debating these issues, from a pragmatic standpoint many countries do seem to be gravitating toward a consensus on how inflation targeting should work.
All inflation-targeting developed countries target a low positive rate, and emerging-market countries aspire to this kind of target.
No country targets for deflation.
Most countries target inflation in a flexible and forward-looking manner.
Most countries have roughly similar policies toward openness, commitment, and explanation.
If whether the target should be a low positive number or zero is all there is to argue about, that disagreement certainly ranks low on the intensity scale of policy disputes.
Theoretical Pros and Cons From a theoretical perspective, one might think that inflation targets would be most valuable to countries with a history of bad inflation.
These countries' central banks need credibility and have two basic ways to get it.
One is to peg their exchange rate to some hard currency and essentially tie the hands of their central bank.
Currency boards, dollar pegs, and dollarization are all examples of such policies.
The second route is to adopt an inflation target and to stick to it.
If the prior inflation is very bad, as it often is in emerging-market countries, these targets might have to start at a high level and be worked gradually down as the central bank brings inflation under control.
Although inflation targeting is usually described as an antidote to past inflationary binges, it has also been suggested as a cure to potential deflation.
Krugman (1998), for example, has argued that Japan, with nominal interest rates stuck at their floor of zero, can lower real interest rates and stimulate investment by having the Bank of Japan target a positive rate of inflation and do what it can to hit that target.
Inflation-targeting regimes might also work well when a country undergoes what is known as a productivity shock.
Suppose a wave of innovations makes productivity rise, pushing up output and lowering unit labor costs.
For a time this shock might be reflected in higher-than-trend rates of growth of output and lower-than-trend rates of unemployment, making it difficult to rely on normal indicators of demand and supply growth in the conduct of monetary policy.
In such circumstances, a cautious central bank might well just wait for signs of inflation to emerge, thwart the inflation if it occurs, and not rely as heavily on normal measures of aggregate demand growth or labor market tightness.
Such a central bank would, in effect, be following an inflation-targeting regime.
Although liberals in general have been very critical of inflation targeting (Galbraith, 1999), in this case inflation targeting would lead to exactly the type of monetary policy they would favor.
But in some cases, inflation targeting might not work out so well.
One case is plain old recessions.
Suppose there were a recessionary shock to aggregate demand.
Because inflation normally responds slowly to such shocks, inflation targeters could respond in any of three ways.
Strict inflation targeters, sometimes snidely called inflation nutters, might sit idly by and let the recession happen.
Or, if inflation fell below target ranges, some central banks might take steps to boost inflation by expansionary monetary policy.
They would clearly do this if deflation threatened, but they might do it even with low positive rates of inflation below target ranges.
The third possible response involves flexible and forward-looking inflation targeting as is actually practiced in most countries.
Because inflation usually responds slowly to output changes in recessions, flexible inflation-targeting regimes would be free to ease policy to stabilize output, much as would non-targeting central banks.
Forward-looking central banks could even act affirmatively against recessions to prevent future inflation from falling below its target range.
Svensson (1999) argues that such a policy strategy clearly outperforms other monetary regimes.
But even here the flexibility to be forward-looking and to pursue other goals is less than a commitment of the central bank to try to stabilize output or promote full employment.
The exact importance of these other objectives remains in question, even for flexible and forward-looking inflation-targeting regimes.
Other instances in which inflation targeting might not work so well are negative supply shocks, such as most economies experienced in the mid-1970s when oil prices exploded.
In these times, inflation rises just as output falls.
The most flexible and competent central bank in the world would be faced with a difficult dilemma in such circumstances--forestall the recession by making inflation worse or limit the inflation by making the recession worse.
But at least such a central bank would have a choice.
In general, an inflation-targeting central bank would not have much of a choice.
It would be forced to try to limit the inflation by contractionary policies, hence making the recession worse.
Even a flexible, forward-looking inflation-targeting central bank would not have much freedom in such a situation, because in the end the central bank would be evaluated much more on its success in meeting inflation targets than in meeting output growth targets.
Hence, inflation targeting does not appear to solve all the problems central banks might face and cannot be prescribed as a panacea.
It still might be a reasonable policy strategy for most purposes, and it still seems to be generally the proper approach for dealing with histories of inflation or deflation and, perhaps, with productivity shocks.
Actual Experience Theoretical arguments aside, many countries have used inflation targeting for most of the 1990s.
Hence we can do more than theorize: We can actually look at the inflation-targeting experience in several countries and see how it has worked out.
Various authors have done this in two ways.
They have compared a country's post-inflation-targeting history with its pre-inflation-targeting history, and they have compared outcomes in inflation-targeting countries with those in non-targeting countries.
The time series studies have focused mainly on the three countries that have had the longest experience with inflation targeting--New Zealand (adopted in 1990), Canada (1991), and the United Kingdom (1992).
According to the simple numbers, once these countries adopted inflation targeting, actual inflation has fallen in each country, and nominal interest rates have fallen, suggesting lower inflation expectations.
Real measures, such as the growth in output or unemployment, have either shown little change or worsened only slightly.
Generally, unemployment rose as a country disinflated and then returned to its former average level, but sometimes not all the way there.
Looking behind these simple numbers, a number of authors have done more sophisticated econometric tests.
Ammer and Freeman (1995) estimated VAR models for real GDP, price levels, and real interest rates up to the adoption of a targeting regime and then simulated these models into the targeting era, comparing simulated values with actual values.
They found that inflation fell below predictions in all three countries.
Real GDP dipped down and then recovered in New Zealand and the United Kingdom but dipped down and only partly recovered in Canada.
A subsequent analysis by Freeman and Willis (1995) focused more intensely on interest rates.
The authors noted that long-term nominal rates fell in all three countries following the adoption of inflation targeting but then came back up in the mid-1990s.
The latter rises could either indicate that inflation-targeting regimes became less credible or simply reflect the fact that world interest rates were rising at this time.
Freeman and Willis worked out a model to disentangle the two effects and put most of the explanation for rising long-term nominal rates on the behavior of world interest rates, hence suggesting that inflation-targeting regimes remained credible.
A more recent set of authors conducted similar tests.
Mishkin and Posen (1997) noted that all three inflation-targeting countries reduced inflation before adopting a formal targeting regime.
The achievement of inflation targeting, then, was to lock in the gains of earlier fights to stabilize prices.
The authors also estimated VAR equations up to the adoption of inflation targeting and simulated these equations into the targeting period, now for six years.
Just as in the earlier analysis of Ammer and Freeman, this analysis suggested that in all three countries the inflation targeting led to a drop in inflation and nominal interest rates.
In Canada, the rate of growth of real GDP was down slightly; in the other two countries, there was no change in the rate of growth of real GDP.
Similar results were found by Kahn and Parrish (1998).
Despite the fact that inflation had dropped in all three countries before the adoption of inflation targeting, these authors observed upward inflationary blips in New Zealand and Canada; so perhaps the achievement of keeping inflation under control should not be taken for granted.
Their results were buttressed by those of Kuttner and Posen (1999), whose VAR regressions for the United Kingdom found that inflation persistence was reduced by inflation targeting, as measured by inflation itself and by nominal interest rates.
In Canada, there was no inflation persistence before or after inflation targeting as measured by inflation rates, though again targeting reduced inflation persistence as measured by nominal interest rates.
In New Zealand, the results were the opposite--targeting reduced persistence as measured by inflation rates but seemed to increase it slightly as measured by nominal interest rates.
The main cross-sectional study of countries was done by Cecchetti and Ehrmann (1999).
They noted that the decade of the 1990s, when many countries went to inflation targeting, was a good one for economic outcomes: Many monetary regimes tried in this decade are likely to look good.
In their formal work, these authors fit VAR models for twenty-three countries, nine inflation targeters and fourteen non-targeters.
From these models, they deduced policymakers' aversion to inflation volatility.
They found that inflation aversion rose in countries that adopted inflation targeting but only to the level of aversion already apparent in the policies of the non-targeting countries.
At this point, there is very little difference between aversion to inflation in countries that target and countries that do not target inflation.
Taken together, the basic data, the time series tests, and the cross-section tests indicate that inflation targeting has seemed to succeed.
Inflation has dropped materially in the three countries with the longest experience with the regime, and all inflation-targeting countries are still content with inflation targeting, in some cases eight to ten years after its adoption.
Measures of inflation persistence also have dropped.
A seeming weakness of inflation targeting is in its response to unemployment, but at this time one can find little evidence that unemployment has worsened in targeting countries.
At the same time, inflation targeting has been adopted in the 1990s, a good decade for economic outcomes in most countries.
It is unclear how inflation targeting would look in more difficult economic circumstances such as the 1970s.
Is Inflation Targeting Right for the United States?
The hidden question in all this, of course, is whether the United States should go to a regime of explicit inflation targeting.
I am not going to try to answer that question but will make several points.
First, the question of whether the United States does or does not adopt a formal inflation targeting regime is not up to the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Reserve Act now requires the Fed to strive for maximum employment and balanced growth, along with price stability and moderate long-term interest rates.
Until the Congress changes these guidelines, the Fed will continue to pursue these goals.
Second, the Federal Reserve is strongly committed to controlling inflation, however formally this goal is specified in the Fed's mandate.
This can be seen from both words and deeds.
Countless official pronouncements and testimony affirm the importance of controlling inflation.
As for actions, at least Cecchetti and Ehrmann find that the Fed's revealed inflation aversion is now as high as that of the formal inflation-targeting countries.
Given this strong inflation aversion, ultimately there may be little difference between informal inflation targeting as practiced in the United States and flexible, forward-looking inflation targeting as practiced in many other countries around the world.
That said, one could still ask the normative question of whether the United States should go to what I will call a more formal system of inflation targeting.
Such a system would have pluses and minuses.
One potential plus is in credibility and transparency.
Even if the present-day pragmatic Fed responds to exogenous rises in the growth of aggregate supply or drops in the non-inflationary rate of unemployment in a fully accommodative manner, inflation targeting may better communicate the strategy.
For example, explicit inflation-targeting statements may help to make it clear that the Fed is really fighting inflation, not economic growth.
But there are also potential disadvantages.
Economic circumstances have been good in the 1990s, when countries have gone over to inflation targeting, and it is worth repeating that inflation targeting is no panacea.
It may not work well in the presence of negative supply shocks like those experienced throughout the world in the 1970s.
Moreover, there is a potential problem with inflation targeting even in good economic times.
If forecasting inflation is difficult, even forward-looking inflation-targeting central banks may respond to inflationary shocks too late to ward off inflation.
Although there are several ways to forecast inflation, none may be that reliable.
On one side, many analysts use econometric models, but these may have intrinsic problems in periods of significant structural shifts.
The very nature of such shocks is that they are not easy to predict or model.
On the other side, one could imagine constructing leading indicators of inflation, but the experience until now is that not many of these are reliable either.
One could also rely on market expectations of inflation, survey evidence, or other forecasts of inflation.
But if models are not working well and there are not many reliable leading indicators, it is not clear how much information is contained in these other forecasts.
Without models or leading indicators, even forward-looking inflation targeting strategies may not work as well as advertised.
Conclusion Inflation targeting has many things going for it.
This strategy of conducting monetary policy has been widely adopted around the world, and it has seemed to be successful in lowering inflation and perceptions of future inflation.
It has a potential drawback in ignoring explicit consideration of output gaps and unemployment, but perhaps because it has been applied flexibly and in a forward-looking manner, in fact it has not seemed to generate more unemployment than other monetary regimes would have.
It also may not work as well in times of negative supply shocks, though this point remains to be tested.
For the United States, given the strong aversion to inflation already apparent in policy responses, there are various pros and cons, but it is not obvious that a more formal regime of inflation targeting will lead to very great differences in actual monetary policies.
References Akerlof, George A., William T. Dickens, and George L. Perry, 1996, "The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1:1996, 1-76.
Ammer, John, and Richard T. Freeman, 1995, "Inflation Targeting in the 1990s: The Experiences of New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom," Journal of Economics and Business, 47:165-192.
Bernanke, Ben S., Thomas Laubach, Frederic S. Mishkin, and Adam S. Posen, 1999, Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International Experience, Princeton University Press.
Cecchetti, Stephen G., and Michael Ehrmann, 1999, "Does Inflation Targeting Increase Output Volatility?
An International Comparison of Policymakers' Preferences and Outcomes," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 7426.
Freeman, Richard T., and Jonathan L. Willis, 1995, Targeting Inflation in the 1990s: Recent Challenges, Federal Reserve Board, International Finance Discussion Papers 1995-525.
Galbraith, James K, 1999, "The Inflation Obsession: Flying in the Face of Facts," Foreign Affairs, January-February, 78, 152-156.
Kahn, George A., and Klara Parrish, 1998, "Conducting Monetary Policy with Inflation Targets," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review, 3rd quarter, 5-32.
King, Mervyn, 1999, "Challenges for Monetary Policy: New and Old," New Challenges for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, forthcoming.
Krugman, Paul R.,1998, "It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2:1998, 137-206.
Kuttner, Kenneth N., and Adam S. Posen, 1999, "Does Talk Matter After All?
Inflation Targeting and Central Bank Behavior," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, mimeo.
McCallum, Bennett T., 1998, "Robustness Properties of a Rule for Monetary Policy," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 29, 173-204.
Mishkin, Frederic S., and Adam S. Posen, 1997, "Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, August, 9-110.

The 106-month expansion of the 1960s, which was elongated by the Vietnam War, will be surpassed in February.
Nonetheless, there remain few evident signs of geriatric strain that typically presage an imminent economic downturn.
Four or five years into this expansion, in the middle of the 1990s, it was unclear whether, going forward, this cycle would differ significantly from the many others that have characterized post-World War II America.
More recently, however, it has become increasingly difficult to deny that something profoundly different from the typical postwar business cycle has emerged.
Not only is the expansion reaching record length, but it is doing so with far stronger-than-expected economic growth.
Most remarkably, inflation has remained subdued in the face of labor markets tighter than any we have experienced in a generation.
Analysts are struggling to create a credible conceptual framework to fit a pattern of interrelationships that has defied conventional wisdom based on our economy's history of the past half century.
When we look back at the 1990s, from the perspective of say 2010, the nature of the forces currently in train will have presumably become clearer.
We may conceivably conclude from that vantage point that, at the turn of the millennium, the American economy was experiencing a once-in-a-century acceleration of innovation, which propelled forward productivity, output, corporate profits, and stock prices at a pace not seen in generations, if ever.
Alternatively, that 2010 retrospective might well conclude that a good deal of what we are currently experiencing was just one of the many euphoric speculative bubbles that have dotted human history.
And, of course, we cannot rule out that we may look back and conclude that elements from both scenarios have been in play in recent years.
On the one hand, the evidence of dramatic innovations--veritable shifts in the tectonic plates of technology--has moved far beyond mere conjecture.
On the other, these extraordinary achievements continue to be bedeviled by concerns that the so-called New Economy is spurring imbalances that at some point will abruptly adjust, bringing the economic expansion, its euphoria, and wealth creation to a debilitating halt.
This evening I should like to address some of the evidence and issues that pertain to these seemingly alternative scenarios.
What should be indisputable is that a number of new technologies that evolved largely from the cumulative innovations of the past half century have now begun to bring about awesome changes in the way goods and services are produced and, especially, in the way they are distributed to final users.
Those innovations, particularly the Internet's rapid emergence from infancy, have spawned a ubiquity of startup firms, many of which claim to offer the chance to revolutionize and dominate large shares of the nation's production and distribution system.
Capital markets, not comfortable dealing with discontinuous shifts in economic structure, are groping for sensible evaluations of these firms.
The exceptional stock price volatility of most of the newer firms and, in the view of some, their outsized valuations, are indicative of the difficulties of divining from the many, the particular few of the newer technologies and operational models that will prevail in the decades ahead.
How did we arrive at such a fascinating and, to some, unsettling point in history?
The process of innovation, of course, is never-ending.
Yet the development of the transistor after World War II appears in retrospect to have initiated an especial wave of innovative synergies.
It brought us the microprocessor, the computer, satellites, and the joining of laser and fiber-optic technologies.
These, in turn, fostered by the 1990s an enormous new capacity to disseminate information.
To be sure, innovation is not confined to information technologies.
Impressive technical advances can be found in many corners of the economy.
But it is information technology that defines this special period.
The reason is that information innovation lies at the root of productivity and economic growth.
Its major contribution is to reduce the number of worker hours required to produce the nation's output.
Yet, in the vibrant economic conditions that have accompanied this period of technical innovation, many more job opportunities have been created than have been lost.
Indeed, our unemployment rate has fallen notably as technology has blossomed.
One result of the more-rapid pace of IT innovation has been a visible acceleration of the process of "creative destruction," a shifting of capital from failing technologies into those technologies at the cutting edge.
The process of capital reallocation across the economy has been assisted by a significant unbundling of risks in capital markets made possible by the development of innovative financial products, many of which themselves owe their viability to advances in IT.
Before this revolution in information availability, most twentieth-century business decisionmaking had been hampered by wide uncertainty.
Owing to the paucity of timely knowledge of customers' needs and of the location of inventories and materials flowing throughout complex production systems, businesses, as many of you well remember, required substantial programmed redundancies to function effectively.
Doubling up on materials and people was essential as backup to the inevitable misjudgments of the real-time state of play in a company.
Decisions were made from information that was hours, days, or even weeks old.
Accordingly, production planning required costly inventory safety stocks and backup teams of people to respond to the unanticipated and the misjudged.
Large remnants of information void, of course, still persist, and forecasts of future events on which all business decisions ultimately depend are still unavoidably uncertain.
But the remarkable surge in the availability of more timely information in recent years has enabled business management to remove large swaths of inventory safety stocks and worker redundancies.
Information access in real time--resulting, for example, from such processes as electronic data interface between the retail checkout counter and the factory floor or the satellite location of trucks--has fostered marked reductions in delivery lead times and the related workhours required for the production and delivery of all sorts of goods, from books to capital equipment.
The dramatic decline in the lead times for the delivery of capital equipment has made a particularly significant contribution to the favorable economic environment of the past decade.
When lead times for equipment are long, the equipment must have multiple capabilities to deal with the plausible range of business needs likely to occur after these capital goods are delivered and installed.
With lead times foreshortened, many of the redundancies built into capital equipment to ensure that it could meet all plausible alternatives of a defined distant future could be sharply reduced.
That means fewer goods and worker hours are caught up in activities that, while perceived as necessary insurance to sustain valued output, in the end produce nothing of value.
Those intermediate production and distribution activities, so essential when information and quality control were poor, are being reduced in scale and, in some cases, eliminated.
These trends may well gather speed and force as the Internet alters relationships of businesses to their suppliers and their customers.
The process of innovation goes beyond the factory floor or distribution channels.
Design times and costs have fallen dramatically as computer modeling has eliminated the need, for example, of the large staff of architectural specification-drafters previously required for building projects.
Medical diagnoses are more thorough, accurate, and far faster, with access to heretofore unavailable information.
Treatment is accordingly hastened, and hours of procedures eliminated.
Indeed, these developments emphasize the essence of information technology--the expansion of knowledge and its obverse, the reduction in uncertainty.
As a consequence, risk premiums that were associated with all forms of business activities have declined.
Because the future is never entirely predictable, risk in any business action committed to the future--that is, virtually all business actions--can be reduced but never eliminated.
Information technologies, by improving our real-time understanding of production processes and of the vagaries of consumer demand, are reducing the degree of uncertainty and, hence, risk.
In short, information technology raises output per hour in the total economy principally by reducing hours worked on activities needed to guard productive processes against the unknown and the unanticipated.
Narrowing the uncertainties reduces the number of hours required to maintain any given level of production readiness.
In economic terms, we are reducing risk premiums and variances throughout the economic decision tree that drives the production of our goods and services.
This has meant that employment of scarce resources to deal with heightened risk premiums has been reduced.
The relationship between businesses and consumers already is being changed by the expanding opportunities for e-commerce.
The forces unleashed by the Internet are almost surely to be even more potent within and among businesses, where uncertainties are being reduced by improving the quantity, the reliability, and the timeliness of information.
This is the case in many recent initiatives, especially among our more seasoned companies, to consolidate and rationalize their supply chains using the Internet.
Not all technologies, information or otherwise, however, increase productivity--that is, output per hour--by reducing the inputs necessary to produce existing products.
Some new technologies bring about new goods and services with above average value added per workhour.
The dramatic advances in biotechnology, for example, are significantly increasing a broad range of productivity-expanding efforts in areas from agriculture to medicine.
Indeed, in our dynamic labor markets, the resources made redundant by better information, as I indicated earlier, are being drawn to the newer activities and newer products, many never before contemplated or available.
The personal computer, with ever-widening applications in homes and businesses, is one.
So are the fax and the cell phone.
The newer biotech innovations are most especially of this type, particularly the remarkable breadth of medical and pharmacological product development.
At the end of the day, however, the newer technologies obviously can increase outputs or reduce inputs and, hence, increase productivity only if they are embodied in capital investment.
Capital investment here is defined in the broadest sense as any outlay that enhances future productive capabilities and, consequently, capital asset values.
But for capital investments to be made, the prospective rate of return on their implementation must exceed the cost of capital.
Gains in productivity and capacity per real dollar invested clearly rose materially in the 1990s, while the increase in equity values, reflecting that higher earnings potential, reduced the cost of capital.
In particular, technological synergies appear to be engendering an ever-widening array of prospective new capital investments that offer profitable cost displacement.
In a consolidated sense, reduced cost generally means reduced labor cost or, in productivity terms, fewer hours worked per unit of output.
These increased real rates of return on investment and consequent improved productivity are clearly most evident among the relatively small segment of our economy that produces high-tech equipment.
But the newer technologies are spreading to firms not conventionally thought of as high tech.1 It would be an exaggeration to imply that whenever a cost increase emerges on the horizon, there is a capital investment that is available to quell it.
Yet the veritable explosion of high-tech equipment and software spending that has raised the growth of the capital stock dramatically over the past five years could hardly have occurred without a large increase in the pool of profitable projects becoming available to business planners.
As rising productivity growth in the high-tech sector since 1995 has resulted in an acceleration of price declines for equipment embodying the newer technologies, investment in this equipment by firms in a wide variety of industries has expanded sharply.
Had high prospective returns on these capital projects not materialized, the current capital equipment investment boom--there is no better word--would have petered out long ago.
In the event, overall equipment and capitalized software outlays as a percentage of GDP in nominal dollars have reached their highest level in post-World War II history.
To be sure, there is also a virtuous capital investment cycle at play here.
A whole new set of profitable investments raises productivity, which for a time raises profits--spurring further investment and consumption.
At the same time, faster productivity growth keeps a lid on unit costs and prices.
Firms hesitate to raise prices for fear that their competitors will be able, with lower costs from new investments, to wrest market share from them.
Indeed, the increasing availability of labor-displacing equipment and software, at declining prices and improving delivery lead times, is arguably at the root of the loss of business pricing power in recent years.
To be sure, other inflation-suppressing forces have been at work as well.
Marked increases in available global capacity were engendered as a number of countries that were previously members of the autarchic Soviet bloc opened to the West, and as many emerging-market economies blossomed.
Reductions in Cold War spending in the United States and around the world also released resources to more productive private purposes.
In addition, deregulation that removed bottlenecks and hence increased supply response in many economies, especially ours, has been a formidable force suppressing price increases as well.
Finally, the global economic crisis of 1997 and 1998 reduced the prices of energy and other key inputs into production and consumption, helping to hold down inflation for several years.
Of course, Europe and Japan have participated in this recent wave of invention and innovation and have full access to the newer technologies.
However, they arguably have been slower to apply them.
The relatively inflexible and, hence, more costly labor markets of these economies appear to be an important factor.
The high rates of return offered by the newer technologies are largely the result of labor cost displacement, and because it is more costly to dismiss workers in Europe and Japan, the rate of return on the same equipment is correspondingly less there than in the United States.
Here, labor displacement is more readily countenanced both by law and by culture, facilitating the adoption of technology that raises standards of living over time.
There, of course, has been a substantial amount of labor-displacing investment in Europe to obviate expensive increased employment as their economies grow.
But it is not clear to what extent such investment has been directed at reducing existing levels of employment.
It should always be remembered that in economies where dismissing a worker is expensive, hiring one will also be perceived to be expensive.
An ability to reorganize production and distribution processes is essential to take advantage of newer technologies.
Indeed, the combination of a marked surge in mergers and acquisitions, and especially the vast increase in strategic alliances, including across borders, is dramatically altering business structures to conform to the imperatives of the newer technologies.2 We are seeing the gradual breaking down of competition-inhibiting institutions from the keiretsu and chaebol of East Asia, to the dirigisme of some of continental Europe.
The increasingly evident advantages of applying the newer technologies is undermining much of the old political wisdom of protected stability.
The clash between unfettered competitive technological advance and protectionism, both domestic and international, will doubtless engage our attention for many years into this new century.
The turmoil in Seattle last month may be a harbinger of an intensified debate.
However one views the causes of our low inflation and strong growth, there can be little argument that the American economy as it stands at the beginning of a new century has never exhibited so remarkable a prosperity for at least the majority of Americans.
Nonetheless, this seemingly beneficial state of affairs is not without its own set of potential challenges.
Productivity-driven supply growth has, by raising long-term profit expectations, engendered a huge gain in equity prices.
Through the so-called "wealth effect," these gains have tended to foster increases in aggregate demand beyond the increases in supply.
It is this imbalance between growth of supply and growth of demand that contains the potential seeds of rising inflationary and financial pressures that could undermine the current expansion.
Higher productivity growth must show up as increases in real incomes of employees, as profit, or more generally as both.
Unless the propensity to spend out of real income falls, private consumption and investment growth will rise, as indeed it must, since over time demand and supply must balance.
(I leave the effect of fiscal policy for later.)
If this was all that happened, accelerating productivity would be wholly benign and beneficial.
But in recent years, largely as a result of the appreciating values of ownership claims on the capital stock, themselves a consequence, at least in part, of accelerating productivity, the net worth of households has expanded dramatically, relative to income.
This has spurred private consumption to rise even faster than the incomes engendered by the productivity-driven rise in output growth.
Moreover, the fall in the cost of equity capital corresponding to higher share prices, coupled with enhanced potential rates of return, has spurred private capital investment.
There is a wide range of estimates of how much added growth the rise in equity prices has engendered, but they center around 1 percentage point of the somewhat more than 4 percentage point annual growth rate of GDP since late 1996.
Such overall extra domestic demand can be met only with increased imports (net of exports) or with new domestic output produced by employing additional workers.
The latter can come only from drawing down the pool of those seeking work or from increasing net immigration.
Thus, the impetus to spending from the wealth effect by its very nature clearly cannot persist indefinitely.
In part, it adds to the demand for goods and services before the corresponding increase in output fully materializes.
It is, in effect, increased purchasing from future income, financed currently by greater borrowing or reduced accumulation of assets.
If capital gains had no evident effect on consumption or investment, their existence would have no influence on output or employment either.
Increased equity claims would merely match the increased market value of productive assets, affecting only balance sheets, not flows of goods and services, not supply or demand, and not labor markets.
But this is patently not the case.
Increasing perceptions of wealth have clearly added to consumption and driven down the amount of saving out of current income and spurred capital investment.
To meet this extra demand, our economy has drawn on all sources of added supply.
Our net imports and current account deficits have risen appreciably in recent years.
This has been financed by foreign acquisition of dollar assets fostered by the same sharp increases in real rates of return on American capital that set off the wealth effect and domestic capital goods boom in the first place.
Were it otherwise, the dollar's foreign exchange value would have been under marked downward pressure in recent years.
We have also relied on net immigration to augment domestic output.
And finally, we have drawn down the pool of available workers.
The bottom line, however, is that, while immigration and imports can significantly cushion the consequences of the wealth effect and its draining of the pool of unemployed workers for awhile, there are limits.
Immigration is constrained by law and its enforcement; imports, by the willingness of global investors to accumulate dollar assets; and the draw down of the pool of workers by the potential emergence of inflationary imbalances in labor markets.
Admittedly, we are groping to infer where those limits may be.
But that there are limits cannot be open to question.
However one views the operational relevance of a Phillips curve or the associated NAIRU (the nonaccelerating inflation rate of unemployment)--and I am personally decidedly doubtful about it--there has to be a limit to how far the pool of available labor can be drawn down without pressing wage levels beyond productivity.
The existence or nonexistence of an empirically identifiable NAIRU has no bearing on the existence of the venerable law of supply and demand.
To be sure, increases in wages in excess of productivity growth may not be inflationary, and destructive of economic growth, if offset by decreases in other costs or declining profit margins.
A protracted decline in margins, however, is a recipe for recession.
Thus, if our objective of maximum sustainable economic growth is to be achieved, the pool of available workers cannot shrink indefinitely.
As my late friend and eminent economist Herb Stein often suggested: If a trend cannot continue, it will stop.
What will stop the wealth-induced excess of demand over productivity-expanded supply is largely developments in financial markets.
That process is already well advanced.
For the equity wealth effect to be contained, either expected future earnings must decline, or the discount factor applied to those earnings must rise.
There is little evidence of the former.
Indeed, security analysts, reflecting detailed information on and from the companies they cover, have continued to revise upward long-term earnings projections.
However, real rates of interest on long-term BBB corporate debt, a good proxy for the average of all corporate debt, have already risen well over a full percentage point since late 1997, suggesting increased pressure on discount factors.3 This should not be a surprise because an excess of demand over supply ultimately comes down to planned investment exceeding saving that would be available at the economy's full potential.
In the end, balance is achieved through higher borrowing rates.
Thus, the rise in real rates should be viewed as a quite natural consequence of the pressures of heavier demands for investment capital, driven by higher perceived returns associated with technological breakthroughs and supported by a central bank intent on defusing the imbalances that would undermine the expansion.
We cannot predict with any assurance how long a growing wealth effect--more formally, a rise in the ratio of household net worth to income--will persist, nor do we suspect can anyone else.
A diminution of the wealth effect, I should add, does not mean that prices of assets cannot keep rising, only that they rise no more than income.
A critical factor in how the rising wealth effect and its ultimate limitation will play out in the market place and the economy is the state of government, especially federal, finances.
The sharp rise in revenues (at a nearly 8 percent annual rate since 1995) has been significantly driven by increased receipts owing to realized capital gains and increases in compensation directly and indirectly related to the huge rise in stock prices.
Both the Administration and the Congress have chosen wisely to allow unified budget surpluses to build and have usefully focused on eliminating the historically chronic borrowing from social security trust funds to finance current outlays.
The growing unified budget surpluses have absorbed a good part of the excess of potential private demand over potential supply.
A continued expansion of the surplus would surely aid in sustaining the productive investment that has been key to leveraging the opportunities provided by new technology, while holding down a further reliance on imports and absorption of the pool of available workers.
I trust that the recent flurry of increased federal government outlays, seemingly made easier by the emerging surpluses, is an aberration.
In today's environment of rapid innovation, growing unified budget surpluses can obviate at least part of the rebalancing pressures evident in marked increases in real long-term interest rates.
As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, it may be many years before we fully understand the nature of the rapid changes currently confronting our economy.
We are unlikely to fully comprehend the process and its interactions with asset prices until we have been through a complete business cycle.
Regrettably, we at the Federal Reserve do not have the luxury of awaiting a better set of insights into this process.
Indeed, our goal, in responding to the complexity of current economic forces, is to extend the expansion by containing its imbalances and avoiding the very recession that would complete a business cycle.
If we knew for sure that economic growth would soon be driven wholly by gains in productivity and growth of the working age population, including immigration, we would not need to be as concerned about the potential for inflationary distortions.
Clearly, we cannot know for sure, because we are dealing with world economic forces which are new and untested.
While we endeavor to find the proper configuration of monetary and fiscal policies to sustain the remarkable performance of our economy, there should be no ambiguity on the policies required to support enterprise and competition.
I believe that we as a people are very fortunate: When confronted with the choice between rapid growth with its inevitable insecurities and a stable, but stagnant economy, given time, Americans have chosen growth.
But as we seek to manage what is now this increasingly palpable historic change in the way businesses and workers create value, our nation needs to address the associated dislocations that emerge, especially among workers who see the security of their jobs and their lives threatened.
Societies cannot thrive when significant segments perceive its functioning as unjust.
It is the degree of unbridled fierce competition within and among our economies today--not free trade or globalization as such--that is the source of the unease that has manifested itself, and was on display in Seattle a month ago.
Trade and globalization are merely the vehicles that foster competition, whose application and benefits currently are nowhere more evident than here, today, in the United States.
Confronted face-on, no one likes competition; certainly, I did not when I was a private consultant vying with other consulting firms.
But the competitive challenge galvanized me and my colleagues to improve our performance so that at the end of the day we and, indeed, our competitors, and especially our clients, were more productive.
There are many ways to address the all too real human problems that are the inevitable consequences of accelerating change.
Restraining competition, domestic or international, to suppress competitive turmoil is not one of them.
That would be profoundly counterproductive to rising standards of living.
We are in a period of dramatic gains in innovation and technical change that challenge all of us, as owners of capital, as suppliers of labor, as voters and policymakers.
How well policy can be fashioned to allow the private sector to maximize the benefits of innovations that we currently enjoy, and to contain the imbalances they create, will shape the economic configuration of the first part of the new century.
Footnotes 1 Since the early 1990s, the annual growth rate in output per hour of nonfinancial corporate businesses outside high tech has risen by a full percentage point.
2 For example, the emergence of many alternate technologies in areas where only one or two will set the standard and survive has created high-risk, high-reward outcomes for their creators.

