I would like to discuss a topic that is of particular interest to me--the transparency of central banks.
As you know, transparency relates broadly to the openness of a central bank in stating its monetary policy decisions and explaining the reasoning behind them.
I would like to make two main points: First, there is a strong rationale for a high degree of transparency in central banking; second, the world's major central banks have become quite transparent in recent years.
Of course, the views expressed are my own and should not be interpreted as the position of the Federal Open Market Committee or of the Board of Governors.
The Past and Recent Trends in Transparency In the past, central banks around the world tended to operate with considerable secrecy.
The need for and appropriateness of such secrecy was virtually unquestioned--it was part of the culture of central banking.
Indeed, the one word of advice for a new central banker was probably "mystique."
That single word encapsulated much of the tradition and wisdom of how central banks related to the public just a few years ago.
As you are aware, the Federal Reserve and other central banks have moved considerably away from mystique and toward transparency in recent years.
For example, the new European Central Bank has incorporated a number of transparency aspects in its policy process and has emphasized the importance of communications.
To highlight this importance, Otmar Issing, the Bank's chief economist and a member of its Executive Board, characterized communications as the "hidden pillar" of the ECB's monetary policy strategy.
The Bank of Japan, likewise, has taken steps toward greater transparency, particularly following the revision of its governing law in 1998.
In the United Kingdom, the Bank of England Act of 1998, which established the operational independence of the Bank, also strengthened transparency measures that the Bank had implemented earlier in the 1990s.
Like the Federal Reserve, these central banks announce policy changes after meetings of their monetary policy committees and hold press conferences or publish minutes to explain policy deliberations.
They also regularly offer detailed accounts of developments in the economy and provide projections for inflation and economic activity.
Reasons for Transparency Why is increased transparency viewed as such an important issue?
The primary task of central banks is to get monetary policy right--that is, to pursue policies that effectively promote the objectives established by their legislatures or parliaments, such as stable prices, full employment, and maximum sustainable growth.
Communicating what the central bank is doing, and why it is doing it, is of secondary importance to getting it right.
Nonetheless, transparency is important, and even valuable, for two reasons.
Transparency, Independence, and Accountability First, over recent decades it has become increasingly clear that central banks need to have a considerable degree of independence to carry out their jobs effectively.
Of course, central banks are part of their governments, ideally subject to a well-defined legal framework.
But there is now a broad consensus that central banks should be able to apply their own professional judgment in setting their operational instrument, usually a short-term interest rate.
To be sure, this independence does not refer to the goals of monetary policy.
In a democracy, it is appropriate that the central bank's ultimate goals should reflect the common good and, in that spirit, should be set by voters' representatives.
Rather, independence applies to the instrument settings and other policy choices made by the central bank to achieve the ultimate policy goals.
The main reason that central banks need to be independent in using their instruments is that effective monetary policy requires a distant time horizon.
The monetary policy most appropriate for long-run stability and growth of an economy may not be politically popular in the short run.
But along with a high degree of independence, central banks are required to account for their decisions in various ways.
This, too, is appropriate in a democracy: The public has a right to know what its unelected, as well as elected, officials are doing, and why.
And this is the reason that transparency is so important for supporting the independence of the central bank.
Transparency facilitates a broad understanding of what the central bank is doing and thereby gives the public the tools to hold the independent central bank accountable.
Transparency, in fact, can play a valuable role in reinforcing the institutional independence of a central bank.
History has shown that, even with the best intentions and safeguards, the independence of a central bank can come under strain when the appropriate long-run policy is unpopular in the short run.
The clarity transparency brings to the objectives and strategy of policy can greatly help a central bank explain its decisions in relation to the objectives of long-run price stability and sustainable economic growth.
Transparency and Policy Effectiveness The second reason transparency is important is that clarity and predictability of policy decisions may enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy.
The Federal Reserve controls a very short-term interest rate--the overnight federal funds rate--but, as you know, theory and empirical evidence make clear that longer-term rates matter most for the economy.
Those longer-term rates, in turn, reflect expectations of future short-term rates, as well as premiums for uncertainty.
If the monetary authority can be clearer about what it is doing now and what it plans to do--not in the sense of setting future moves in stone, but rather in terms of explaining risks that might influence future policy--then market participants can improve their expectations of future short rates.
Also, less uncertainty about monetary policy might reduce the premium for uncertainty.
Thus, transparency ought to bring the rates that matter most for the macroeconomy into closer alignment with the intentions of monetary policymakers.
In effect, greater transparency allows policymakers to work with the market, not against it.
The benefits from better communication and greater transparency can also be appreciated by considering the role of credibility and its effects on inflation expectations and, hence, the longer end of the term structure of interest rates.
If the public is unclear about the strategy and objectives of the central bank, the credibility of monetary policy may suffer.
Current economic developments or policy actions directed toward short-run concerns could have an outsized influence on perceptions regarding the more distant future--especially long-run inflation expectations and, therefore, long-term interest rates.
Because such changes in perceptions could be counterproductive, concern about triggering them might discourage a central bank from taking action that otherwise could have been appropriate and beneficial for the economy in the near term.
Lack of transparency and lack of credibility, in this sense, could reduce the effectiveness of monetary policy in stabilizing the economy against transitory shocks.
A concrete example of this can be seen in recent developments in the United States.
Consider the pickup in inflation that we saw last year, which many economists would attribute at least in part to the temporary effects of increased energy costs.
Had the FOMC not been transparent and credible about its long-run objective of price stability, the public might have raised its perception of long-run inflation as a result of this unfavorable development.
Such a shift would have greatly complicated the policy judgments that led to the easings that the FOMC implemented earlier this year.
Transparency and credibility about the Federal Reserve's longer-term intentions, however, and the accompanying stability of longer-run inflation expectations, provided greater flexibility in taking action.
To be sure, greater transparency on the part of the central bank does not guarantee that markets will accurately forecast interest rates.
As you well know, forecasts can prove inaccurate simply because the economy changes unexpectedly.
And, despite efforts toward better communication, neither market participants nor central banks can forecast all the twists of a rapidly evolving economy.
The central bank needs to be flexible, acting prudently but forcefully when required.
And another caveat: The accurate anticipation of policy by market participants is not a panacea.
Though a tighter link between monetary policy expectations and long-term interest rates may lessen the need for the central bank to move its policy instrument as much or as quickly, market adjustments are not a substitute for monetary policy action.
Market movements in response to anticipated central bank actions must be validated by the central bank when they are, in the view of the policymakers, correct, in order for financial markets to continue to reflect the intentions of policymakers.
Definition of Transparency So far, I've avoided giving a precise definition of transparency.
In part, that's because providing an exact definition is difficult.
Fundamentally, transparency refers to being forthcoming about goals and short-term tactics and, therefore, being easily and clearly understood.
But being understood can have very different meanings depending on the particular aspects of the monetary policy process one considers.
Certainly, transparency should encompass clear communication of the longer-run objectives and strategy of monetary policy.
In the United States, for example, by law we have objectives for both employment and price stability, neither of which is quantified in statute.
Indeed, in our case, stating a numerical target for the inflation rate of some specific price index, for instance, might not enhance transparency but instead diminish it.
One could argue that, despite the best efforts of government economists and statisticians, inflation measures based on our various price indexes are not sufficiently refined to offer an accurate basis for defining price stability.
Some indexes undergo conceptual redefinitions from time to time and are subject to frequent revisions.
And we all know that all price indexes can be subjected to outsized influences by special factors that may obscure meaningful underlying trends.
For a variety of reasons, measures of inflation based on various indexes can differ considerably at any point in time.
And none is known to always offer the superior reading.
Thus, in evaluating risks with respect to our price stability objective, I believe that it is preferable to consider all the various measures and not be unduly influenced by a numerical target for any specific index.
Obviously, under these circumstances, changing policy just because a single, specific price index is out of line might not always be sensible, especially if doing so might have detrimental consequences for our other objectives.
For this reason, it seems to me that defining our price stability objective in terms of a numerical target for the rate of inflation of some specific price index could well be problematic.
Indeed, I see considerable advantages to this operating definition of price stability: Price stability is a situation in which economic agents need not take account of expected changes in the general price level in their economic decisionmaking.
A second aspect of transparency is public announcement of changes in the short-run operating target.
In general, when central banks target a short-term interest rate, this aspect of transparency is reasonably easy to implement because an interest rate is easy for financial market participants, members of the legislature, and the general public alike to understand.
But transparency may be more difficult to achieve when the central bank employs other operating targets, such as the reserve targets that the Federal Reserve used in the early 1980s.
Changes in such targets could often reflect technical developments and not changes in the desired policy stance.
And yet, there are instances when quantitative targets may be more informative about the basic intent of policymakers than a short-term interest rate.
For example, when the overnight rate of interest is nearly zero, a monetary policy easing may be rather difficult to communicate in terms of that interest rate.
Last month’s decision by the Bank of Japan to change its operating target from the overnight rate of interest, which was already near zero, to a target for reserves, may reflect, in part, this consideration.
A third aspect of transparency has to do with the central bank's attitudes toward the future--the risks facing the economy.
In pricing longer-term financial instruments--bonds, equities, and derivative instruments--market participants need to factor in the longer-term economic and policy outlook.
Investors' ability to make such judgments is enhanced by giving them information about how the central bank sees the probable evolution of the economy in the foreseeable future, in part so that market participants can better judge the likely evolution of monetary policy.
A fourth dimension of transparency has to do with the extent of information on the central bank’s rationale for its policy moves.
Such information helps market participants formulate their own outlook for the economy and monetary policy and therefore their projections of future interest rates and financial asset prices.
And it also helps the public put monetary policy action in context so that accountability of the central bank is as informed as possible.
And a final aspect has to do with the regularity and predictability of the timing of policy decisions and communications.
When a central bank is reasonably predictable in its policy timing, its decisions are likely to raise fewer questions and are therefore relatively easy for the public to comprehend.
When policy achieves a high level of transparency in this sense, unexpected or rapidly evolving economic developments and not policy changes are the news.
This, of course, is not to say that a central bank will never surprise the market.
As I mentioned earlier, the most important task of a central bank is to get monetary policy right.
At times, getting policy right will involve taking action unexpected by the market--for example, in its timing or magnitude.
This situation is most likely to arise when economic or financial conditions are changing particularly rapidly.
This might be associated with financial or economic crisis--as in the fall of 1987 or 1998--but it need not be.
These cases are relatively infrequent, but they do occur.
The presumption against taking a surprise move, in timing or magnitude, should be strong, but it is a rebuttable presumption.
The challenge is to weigh the good that comes from taking a move that a rapidly evolving situation appears to call for against the cost of a diminished sense of regularity in the policy process, which should be the norm in supporting transparency.
U.S. Practices on Transparency In February 1994, the FOMC adopted the practice of immediately announcing changes in its policy stance and, in effect, began to disclose immediately the expected federal funds rate.
In subsequent FOMC meetings, when no policy action had been taken, no formal announcement followed.
However, in the absence of a policy action the media were informed that the meeting had ended and that there would be no further announcement.
In this way, from that point on, the FOMC immediately disclosed changes in its policy and its decisions not to take policy action at its scheduled meeting.
Though these steps clarified the current stance of monetary policy, the Committee recognized that it could further enhance the transparency of its actions by providing timely indications of factors that might influence the future direction of policy.
The idea was that providing more information about the Committee's views of the economic outlook would allow financial market prices to reflect more accurately the probable future stance of monetary policy.
When the stance of policy changed, the statement disclosing the action could be and was used to provide an indication of the factors likely to influence the Committee's future decisions.
Such information, however, was not provided when the Committee decided not to change its policy since no announcement accompanied such decisions.
To bridge this gap, the Committee decided at its December 1998 meeting to announce major shifts in its view about prospective developments even in cases when the current policy setting remained unchanged.
This step toward additional disclosure was first implemented in May 1999.
In August 1999, the FOMC established a Working Group on the Directive and Disclosure Policy to study the Committee's disclosure procedures and propose further improvements to them.
After discussion of the Working Group's proposals, the Committee in December of that year adopted the procedures that are now in place.
Under the current procedures, which were announced in January 2000, the FOMC issues a statement to the public immediately after every meeting.
The statement provides information regarding the policy stance adopted at the meeting and the Committee's view about prospective developments.
It is issued whether or not the Committee changes either its policy or its view about the future.
With the new procedures, the Committee adopted new language to describe its views about the economic outlook.
The language indicates the Committee's sense of the balance of risks in the outlook against the background of the Committee's long-run goals of price stability and sustainable economic growth.
Specifically, it indicates whether the Committee believes that the risks are "balanced with respect to prospects for both goals," "weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures," or "weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate economic weakness."
By economic weakness, we do not just mean recession; I believe that the Committee would be justified in recognizing risks weighted toward economic weakness if it saw prospects for subpar growth--that is growth below the rate of increase in the economy’s potential.
None of these changes has altered the way in which the FOMC decides the appropriate course of policy action.
The FOMC has not viewed the issuance of the balance of risks statement as a substitute for needed interest rate changes.
To repeat, the most important task of a central bank is to get monetary policy right.
Regardless of changes in its disclosure procedures, this has always been and remains the Committee’s foremost goal.
Current Economic Conditions and Outlook Let me close by linking this discussion of transparency to the current economic situation.
Since late last year, evidence has accumulated that the economy would be unlikely to meet the Committee’s goal of maximum sustainable noninflationary growth.
Therefore, the FOMC has moved aggressively, cutting the federal funds rate 200 basis points since the turn of the year.
Two of those actions were taken between meetings-- January 3 and, of course, yesterday.
Over this period, economic conditions were changing rapidly.
And, in the current situation, we were facing an unusually long intermeeting period.
Although some fog always surrounds the outlook, there is more than the usual amount of uncertainty at this juncture about the economic future.
Clearly, many businesses were surprised by the extent of the slowdown in sales late last year, and inventories became uncomfortably high in some sectors.
There also is talk of an overhang of high-tech capital, although quantifying the magnitude of that overhang is very difficult.
Some producers of high-tech equipment may have misjudged the short-term demand for such equipment, perhaps, in part, because they assumed that the strength in investment experienced during 1999 and the early part of 2000 would continue.
Moreover, a number of high-tech companies have failed over the past year, reducing the demand for new investment--both directly through the absence of their own spending and indirectly by increasing the supply of nearly new equipment on the second-hand market.
These imbalances will take some time to be corrected.
But businesses are moving quickly to adjust levels of production.
And final demand should be supported by the lower interest rates put in place by the financial markets and the Federal Reserve.
Despite the decline in stock prices, I believe that the underlying technical advances that have been so important to macroeconomic developments over the last five years will continue and will provide support over time for business and consumer spending.
But what interest rates will be associated with a return to healthy growth in spending remains an open question.
Incoming data have remained mixed, but on balance suggest that the economy has been expanding very slowly.
As our announcement yesterday noted, we are especially concerned about the outlook for capital investments.
Profit expectations have been revised down, and reports that businesses have been postponing capital improvements are widespread.
Moreover, the downward revisions to earnings expectations have hit the stock market hard since last fall, and declines in equity wealth could begin to show through more forcefully to consumption spending.
All in all, I think it is too early to have a strong conviction that the economy is reaching the end of this period of quite slow growth.
As the FOMC noted yesterday, the risks remain toward economic weakness.
Conclusion Our announcement yesterday was part of an ongoing effort to communicate with the public at large and with markets.

These benefits make up roughly 40 percent of the income received by aged families and more than 80 percent of the income received by the poorest aged families.
Social security has not eliminated aged poverty, but it has been largely responsible for a reducing the poverty rate among aged families from 35 percent in 1959 to 11 percent today.
Because of its support to aged people of all incomes, poll after poll has indicated social security’s unique political popularity.
Politicians treat social security as the “third rail” of U.S. politics: “Touch it and you die.” The original Social Security Act was passed in 1935, the most significant and lasting domestic policy achievement of Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal.
The program’s history in the twentieth century was one of steady growth.
The combined employer-employee payroll tax to finance the program started at 2 percent in 1937 and rose gradually through the years to 12.4 percent by the close of the century.
This tax was assessed on the first $3,000 of wages in 1937 and on the first $76,200 in 2000.
Coverage was sporadic at first, but the program now covers more than 96 percent of the workforce.
A disability insurance program was added to the normal retirement benefits in 1954, and benefits were automatically indexed for inflation beginning in 1975.
Although growth was the watchword in the twentieth century, many commentators now predict a slowdown in program growth.
The program is now mature, in the sense that coverage is nearly universal and benefits automatically rise at roughly the same rate as overall wages and salaries.
But unlike the situation for most of the twentieth century, as we move to the twenty-first century the United States will be experiencing a massive aging of its population, with more people receiving benefits compared to those financing benefits.
Whereas there were 16 workers paying taxes for every retired beneficiary in 1950, the number has dropped to 3.4 now and is slated to drop to 2 in another three decades.
The consequence is that it will take an immediate payroll tax increase, now estimated at 1.9 percent (bringing the total to 14.3 percent), just to pay for the present benefit system over the standard seventy-five-year forecasting period, and a greater tax increase if this forecasting period is extended even a few years.1 Yet unlike in the twentieth century, when such a payroll tax increase would have been the normal response to impending financial problems, almost all politicians of either party now oppose further payroll tax increases, and some advocate reductions.
What worked politically in the twentieth century may not work in the twenty-first century.
In this article I will try to assess the economic and political outlook for social security, the signature social program of the twentieth century, in the twenty-first century.
I first review the objectives that I believe the United States should consider paramount in dealing with social security, and some of the problems now facing the system.
Then I will promote my own requirement for social security reform--whatever else it does, the reform should try to raise national saving, in effect prefunding future benefit payments.2 Objectives and Problems Social Protections.
The fundamental objective in dealing with social security should be to preserve its massive system of social protections.
The program contains some internal redistribution, in the sense that returns on contributed payroll taxes are higher for low-wage workers than for high-wage workers.
These higher returns, reflected in relatively higher benefit payments for lower-wage retirees, largely explain why the program has been responsible for so much reduction of poverty among the aged and why social security accounts for such a high share of the retirement income received by lower- income retirees.
In addition, the disability program gives workers and their families protection against the financial consequences of workplace disabilities.
Family members of workers who die prematurely receive survivor’s insurance.
Social security benefits are annuities, so that payments go on as long as retirees live with added protection for surviving spouses.
These annuities are also set in real terms, which means that their purchasing power is automatically protected from the ravages of inflation.
Social security is one of the few pension programs in America with this feature.
All of these social protections have existed for some time, in fact for so long that they may be taken for granted.
Preserving them should be the first order of business.
Although preserving the main social protections is fundamental, the structure of benefits could certainly be improved or modified.
One obvious change is in coverage.
Program coverage is now nearly universal, except for a share of state and local government workers and some other workers in sectors that will eventually be fully covered.
A standard suggestion for program reform is to move toward complete coverage.
A second suggestion involves poverty reduction.
Because of the way benefits for surviving spouses are computed, America still has high poverty rates among aged widows, rates that are much higher than those in other developed countries.
There are relatively simple and inexpensive ways to change the computation of survivor benefits to cut into this high rate of poverty for aged widows.3 Two other problems with the benefit system receive most of the discussion.
One involves the so-called normal retirement age for the computation of benefits.
The social security system computes benefits through a formula based on the payroll tax contributions that workers have paid into the trust fund.
This computation leads to a standard benefit received at age sixty-five, the normal retirement age now, as indeed it was back in 1935 when the program was established.
But, of course, workers live much longer now than they did then, and the gradual lengthening of retirees’ life spans is the major cause of the financial problems now facing the system.
Workers can retire and collect benefits as early as age sixty-two, taking an actuarial reduction in benefits if they do so.
They can also gain more benefits from the delayed retirement credit if they work past age sixty-five.
Previous legislation has the normal retirement age rising in steps to age sixty-seven over the next two decades.
Many have proposed going beyond this legislation and tying the normal retirement age to life expectancy, computing benefit payments on the assumption that different cohorts of workers could be spending a constant share of their expected lifetimes in working and retirement years.
Proposals to raise the normal retirement age are hugely controversial, perhaps because they are generally misunderstood.
What is misunderstood is the fact that, if workers are still permitted to retire and collect benefits at age sixty-two, the rising normal retirement age really means only a slight cut in benefits for workers retiring at any fixed age.
It does not mean that these workers actually have to work until these older ages.
This slight cut in the growth of future benefits seems like a reasonable approach to dealing with a situation where workers are arriving at present retirement ages in a healthier and healthier status, and will be living longer and longer.
The second issue that commonly arises on the benefit side reflects the fact that social security is largely a social protection program, not a full program for retirement benefits.
Social security today provides most retirement income for low-wage retirees but a lesser share as we move up the income scale.
The idea is that higher-wage retirees should, if they wish to continue their pre-retirement living standards, supplement social security with private pensions and their own saving.
Unfortunately, many do not.
Roughly 40 percent of households in the $25,000 to $50,000 income class do not have other pensions, and roughly 30 percent of households with incomes above $50,000 do not have other pensions.
These workers at least ought to be thoroughly warned about the impending decline in their standard of living, perhaps induced to save more by tax incentives, and perhaps even required to save more.
I’ll return to this saving issue below.
Actuarial Balance.
From its inception, social security has been set up in a very responsible way financially.
Employer and employee taxes, along with a small amount of revenue from the income taxation of benefits, go into a trust fund that is used to pay social security benefits.
For the first forty years of its history this trust fund ran on a pay-as-you-go basis.
Current payroll tax revenues were used to pay benefits, with little system accumulation of assets.
Program changes made in the 1980s moved slightly toward the prefunding of benefits.
The coming demographic shift was well recognized in the 1980s, and changes made then raised payroll taxes ahead of benefit payments, with the consequence that the social security trust fund is now running a cash surplus of about $150 billion per year, rising about $15 billion a year for the next few years.
This surplus is invested in government securities, with social security credited for all interest on these securities.
Political talk about stealing social security benefits to finance the rest of government is fundamentally inaccurate.
No social security funds are being stolen; the social security trust fund is making loans and getting full interest on these loans.
In this respect, the social security fund is behaving just like any other prefunded pension plan that invests in Treasury securities.
Although the system’s financial situation appears healthy, as we look ahead things change.
The system builds in a financial exercise in which the trustees--three cabinet officers, the head of the Social Security Administration, and two outside members--make actuarial forecasts seventy-five years into the future.4 Seventy-five years is obviously a long time, and these forecasts should by no means be viewed as precise.
At the same time, given the relatively predictable future demographics of the country--people live reasonably predictable lifetimes and the future size of the labor force can be reasonably well projected--these forecasts are useful indicators of future imbalances.
At this time, the forecasts indicate that the system will continue to build its assets for another twenty years and then run these assets down fairly sharply as the huge baby boom population moves into retirement.
System assets are projected to be exhausted in year 2038, and it would take an immediate 1.9 percent increase in the combined employer-employee payroll tax rate to extend the system’s assets for the seventy-five year forecasting period.
Given the aging of the population, the asset shortfall gets much more dramatic beyond seventy-five years.
Viewed as a share of the overall economy, if no changes are made, retirement and disability benefits are expected to rise from 4.2 percent of total national output today to 6.7 percent of total output by the end of the seventy-five year period, and to higher levels further in the future.
Perhaps more significantly, the share of federal revenues required to fund these types of entitlement spending plus Medicare nearly double in the course of four decades, crowding out other types of government spending or requiring new federal tax increases.
These indicators suggest that some changes should be made on the benefit side.
Many such changes are possible, and I will not get into the full range.
But if changes are to be made on the benefit side, both to improve the trust fund finances and to limit the share of total output and federal revenues used for entitlement spending, it is infinitely better to make them early rather than late.
These entitlement programs are retirement programs, and workers make their retirement plans based on an assumption of benefits that will be available.
It is widely viewed as unfair to change benefits for present retirees who have already left their main job, and in fact important benefit cuts for retirees have never been enacted in the entire history of social security.
It is nearly as unfair to cut the benefits of workers nearing retirement ages, for precisely the same reason.
Hence, if benefits are to be cut enough to matter, they should be cut in a very gradual way, beginning early, and with the largest cuts in store for the youngest workers for whom retirement is in the distant future and retirement planning is still very flexible.
In this sense, these future dates can be very misleading.
Though the system might reasonably expect enough future revenues to pay the present schedule of benefits until 2038, sensible changes in benefits schedules should be enacted well before then.
Rates of Return.
Because social security benefit payments are based on workers’ previous payroll tax contributions, it is possible to compute implicit internal rates of return on these contributions.
Many years ago, the economist Paul Samuelson established that the long-run equilibrium real rate of return on a pay-as-you-go pension fund of this sort would be equal to the trend rate of growth of real wages plus the trend rate of growth of the labor force, roughly 1 percent according to present assumptions.5 But these are equilibrium returns.
As the system builds to maturity, returns can be higher.
For example, workers born in the nineteenth century and retiring in the early years of social security got much higher returns--they received full benefits but with contributions paid only from 1937 on.
Workers born early in the twentieth century are getting reasonable returns.
For example, single workers born in 1920, earning average amounts of wage income and living normal life spans, are receiving a real return on their and their employer’s social security contributions of nearly 3 percent, roughly what would have been available in the bond market over this period.
In addition, because of the internal redistribution in the system, lower-wage workers of any birth cohort receive higher-than-average returns.
Workers of any birth cohort who die early receive lower-than- average returns.
These differences are conscious and, in fact, implicit in the social insurance structure of the program.6 But now that the program is maturing, the inalterable mathematical logic of Samuelson’s proof is coming true, and average implicit rates of return are dropping toward 1 percent.
Whereas workers born in 1920 who have had average incomes and life spans received real returns essentially equal to those on government bonds, such workers born now are expected to receive real returns of about 1 percent, much below the likely real return on bonds.
High-income workers born now could get negative returns.
Nothing can be done about these basic profiles.
The underlying math is incontrovertible.
Moreover, social security paid out high financial returns to earlier birth cohorts, effectively laying a further tax on younger and as yet unborn workers.
These younger workers may regret both the underlying math and this tax, but they cannot change either.
And in terms of underlying social equity, these younger workers should remember that they did not have to live through two world wars and a depression and that they are benefiting from the rising productivity and living standards of the U.S. economy.
But it is still true that if internal rates of return continue downward, the basic political popularity of social security could at some point be threatened.
This is why prefunding, or new national saving, is so important.
Any new funds devoted to the retirement system can, in effect, be invested in new capital and can pay at least the marginal real return on such funds, now roughly 4 percent if funds are invested in bonds and perhaps even more if some funds are invested in equities.
In a macro- economic sense, new saving represents a way to finance added capital investment, making future workers more productive and helping them pay for future benefits.
Though returns are inevitably dropping within the present system, new saving should continue to pay high returns at the margin, and it represents a sensible way to pay for future benefit costs.
Solutions Many solutions have been proposed to deal with this interrelated set of social security problems.
To keep the discussion manageable, I will focus on four basic approaches--one based on the normal twentieth-century response, one that I proposed earlier in the report of the 1994-96 Social Security Advisory Council, and two representing present political opinion in Washington.
Though as I said above, one can make very good arguments for at least a slow trimming of the growth of benefits over time, the proposals are very much alike in that each preserves in essential form the present system of benefits.
Each also preserves the present set of social protections, the first objective I described.
Further, each tries to restore the long-run actuarial solvency of the social security trust fund.
The proposals differ in their economic dimensions--whether they prefund some future benefit costs, whether they raise national saving and take advantage of the higher marginal return on this new saving, and whether they increase payroll tax rates.
The standard twentieth-century solution to the financial problems posed by social security was to raise payroll taxes.
Were this to be done now, these payroll taxes would be invested in government securities and would yield interest down the road.
The combination of future taxes and future interest returns would pay for the rising future benefit costs.
Under present actuarial estimates, an immediate 1.9 percent increase in the combined payroll tax rate is necessary to finance the present benefit schedule for the next seventy-five years.
Although this approach is a simple and straightforward way to lower consumption and raise national saving, it is not altogether appealing.
For economists, it introduces the issue of tax-rate distortions.
As marginal tax rates increase, incentives for people to work and be productive could be reduced.
Social security taxes may not operate like other taxes in this regard, because people do get the money back, albeit with some redistribution.
Moreover, although going from 12.4 percent to 14.3 percent may not seem terribly significant, we must remember that the overall ratio of federal taxes to national output is about 20 percent now, and this increase will come on top of these other taxes.
The cost of tax distortions is usually felt to depend on the square of marginal tax rates.
Hence, though the combined tax rate of 21.9 percent is only 10 percent higher than the present tax rate, the square of these tax rates is 20 percent higher.
Moreover, tax rates cannot be raised forever.
At some point, every country with an aging population has to get off what we might call the tax-and-spend treadmill.
Indeed, impending tax burdens look less onerous for the United States than for other developed countries, mainly because the United States has until now held the line better against tax and benefit increases.
Finally, for what it is worth, tax increases are a political anathema: At this point, no politician of either party would give this approach even passing consideration.
In the set of recommendations accompanying the report of the 1994-96 Advisory Council, I tried to come up with an alternative way to raise national saving.7 Instead of raising payroll tax rates, I suggested that a more popular approach might be mandatory individual accounts held on top of social security.
Because individuals would own these accounts, they might not think of them as tax increases.
Moreover, individuals would be free to invest these funds in a constrained set of stock and bond index funds, much as happens today in employer-controlled defined-contribution private pension accounts.
Even if the investments were confined to bonds, the funds would represent new saving, and their returns would be much higher than present payroll contributions to the pay-as-you-go system.
Permitting stock market investments as well would allow individuals to take advantage of what until now have been greater returns on stocks than on bonds, though as I argue below, these differential returns on equities may not be as great in the future as they have been in the past.
However, it would cost social security more to administer a system of individual accounts than to administer the present system.
Since the accounts would be separate from the social security trust fund, there would also need to be some gradual cuts in the growth of benefits over time to bring the trust fund into long-term actuarial balance.
These cuts could be made by adjusting the normal retirement age as described above, and also trimming benefits to high-income individuals, leaving low-wage and disability benefits largely intact.
I designed the combination of the returns from the individual accounts and the benefit cuts to leave overall future retirement payments roughly constant as a share of total output.
President Clinton suggested an approach that might be more palatable politically.
He proposed voluntary saving accounts that would carry a tax subsidy and be matched.
To limit costs, the voluntary accounts would be available only to lower-income workers, who now have the lowest levels of pension saving.
But, at the same time, voluntary is voluntary.
Only about one-quarter of all low-income households now use freely available tax-subsidized Individual Retirement Accounts, and only about 40 percent use 401(k) plans that carry a tax subsidy and are also matched by employers.
Unlike mandatory accounts, this voluntary approach would not ensure that all underfunded workers looking at reductions in their retirement standard of living would choose to contribute to the new individual accounts.
For the same reason, this approach and other voluntary measures might raise national saving relatively little.
President Clinton also proposed two measures to deal with the actuarial problems of the social security trust fund.
Rather than raising payroll taxes, he would have made transfers of general federal revenues to the social security trust fund.
If these transfers were not financed by new borrowing, they would effectively finance added benefit costs through higher federal taxes or lower government spending than would otherwise be the case.
Provided that there were offsetting cuts in the general government budget, these transfers should raise national saving, just as would higher payroll taxes.
At the same time, the same considerations suggest that there could be some added tax distortions.
Transferring general revenues would imply that for the first time revenues from outside normal trust fund sources would be used to finance social security benefit payments.
There is nothing intrinsically wrong with broadening the tax base beyond the payroll tax, but there is a potential problem in breaching the trust fund limits.
Until now, the social security trust fund has been self-financing.
The present value of all present and future benefit payments has equaled the value of existing stocks of assets plus the present value of present and future tax revenues.
This long-run budget constraint has seemed to limit the growth of benefit payments.
If general revenue transfers were to be introduced, it might become much harder to limit these transfers in the future.
This could be a backdoor way of putting the social security system on just the tax-and-spend treadmill that politicians are trying to avoid and that many other countries have not avoided.
President Clinton also proposed to invest some of social security’s assets directly in common stock index funds instead of government securities.
This reinvestment plan raises several new issues.
First, unlike the add-on individual accounts proposed above, this plan would involve equity investment without underlying new saving.
As such, it would represent only a transfer of wealth with the private sector, not a creation of new national wealth.
Second, because the central fund, and not individuals, would own the equities, the direct government ownership of common stock might threaten normal business-government separations.
Third, as with the individual accounts, one can ask whether future returns to equities will continue to exceed those on bonds.
There is no doubt that stocks have outperformed bonds in the past, but at this point earnings-price ratios on stocks have been driven close to real interest rates on bonds, in the view of many financial experts providing inadequate compensation for the greater risk on stocks.
In this sense, the expected future risk-adjusted returns on stocks may not exceed those on bonds by very much.
President Bush discussed social security in his presidential campaign, but at this point has not been specific about how he would reform the system.
The Administration's budget document gives a few general principles: Reform must not change benefits for current retirees or those nearing retirement.
Social security payroll taxes must not be increased.
Social security trust funds must not be invested in private assets.
Reform should address both the long-term actuarial needs of the system and intergenerational inequities.
Reform must include voluntary personal retirement accounts that are individually controlled.
President Bush is proposing an advisory commission to work out details within these limits.
Though at this point it is impossible to predict what this commission will propose, there is one existing plan is consistent with these guidelines.
The Breaux-Gregg-Kolbe-Stenholm proposal submitted to the Congress in 2000 fits the bill.
The proposal has two main components: Two percentage points of the payroll tax would be devoted to individual accounts--known as "carve out" individual accounts.
Net benefit reductions would be used to bring social security into actuarial balance.
The advantages and disadvantages of such a system would be similar to those of the plan I recommended, with two important exceptions.
First, because the individual accounts are not added onto, but carved out of, the present payroll tax, there would be no immediate increase in national saving, though there could be in the future as the growth in benefits is cut.
Second, because some of the present payroll tax would be diverted to individual accounts, the future growth of benefits would need to be cut much more than in my plan to bring the social security system into long-term actuarial balance.
These cuts would likely entail some combination of an even higher normal retirement age and a further reduction in benefits across the income scale, but other trimmings may also be required.
These competing approaches have clear differences, but they are not so divergent that compromises are out of the question.
One central issue is that of equity investment: How profitable will it be in the future, as opposed to the past?
Will it be profitable enough to account for the greater risk on stocks?
And, if it is done, should it be done through individually owned accounts or through central fund investment?
Individual accounts are more expensive to run, and they may at some point fray the political compromise underlying social security--a general program benefiting all.
At the same time, they avoid the problem of political interference that may result from central fund equity investment, if the government becomes a huge, and perhaps the largest, stockholder for most U.S. corporations.
Then there is the national saving issue, which I think is central.
And here is a potential pitfall--the approaches with the most political popularity may also be those with the least effect on national saving.
The least popular approach involves payroll tax increases to prefund benefits.
The mandatory add-on individual accounts have also not proven very popular and also clearly involve new saving.
Switching to voluntary individual accounts may be a reasonable political compromise, but it also involves much less new saving.
Covering the actuarial deficit by general revenue financing should raise national saving, at least if the non-social-security portion of the federal budget is suitably altered, but it may simultaneously weaken the fiscal discipline that limits the growth of social security benefits.
And it, too, has not proven popular.
Carving the individual accounts out of existing payroll taxes may represent a political compromise, but it does not raise national saving.
Conclusion Social security has been a huge success in the twentieth century, arguably the largest and most popular social program the government has ever adopted.
Its reach is now nearly universal, it has pulled millions of aged individuals out of poverty, and it forms a retirement safety net for virtually all U.S. workers.
The history of social security in the twentieth century has been one of program growth--of tax rates, benefit levels, and coverage levels.
But times are changing.
At this point the system is nearing maturity and is confronted with a new problem--the massive aging of the U.S. population.
We could respond to this population aging, and attendant rise in payroll tax rates necessary to pay for future benefits, by further increases in payroll tax rates, as was the case throughout most of the twentieth century.
Or we could try some new approaches, such as individual accounts, general revenue transfers, or various mechanisms for investing in equities.
All of these can, in principle, pay for the presently scheduled level of future benefits and preserve the actuarial soundness of the social security trust fund.
But only some of them imply new national saving, the high rates of return on this new saving, and new investments in U.S. productivity.
Our hardest job now is to find reform measures that really generate this new saving.
Footnotes 1 The actuarial numbers come from the most recent annual report of the Social Security and Medicare Board of Trustees, 2001.
2 My own argument is given in more depth in Gramlich, 1998.
3 One way is given by Burkhauser and Smeeding, 1994.
4 Social Security and Medicare Board of Trustees, 2001.
5 Samuelson, 1958.
6 Gramlich, 1998, pp.
58 ff.. 7 Advisory Council on Social Security, 1997.
References Advisory Council on Social Security, 1997.
Report of the 1994-96 Advisory Council on Social Security, vols.
1-2.
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Burkhauser, Richard V., and Timothy Smeeeding, 1994.
"Social Security Reform: A Budget Neutral Approach to Reducing Older Women's Disproportionate Risk of Poverty," Maxwell School Policy Brief, Syracuse University, no.
2.
Gramlich, Edward M., 1998.
Is It Time to Reform Social Security?
Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1958.
"An Exact Consumption-Loan Model of Interest with or without the Social Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy (December), pp.

