Ken suggested that I share my thoughts with you about two initiatives that I have been working on recently.
The first, published early this year, analyzed global financial sector consolidation in the G-10 countries.
Today, I will add a few observations about consolidation in the United States.
The second initiative is ongoing and involves the work of the Federal Reserve's Payments System Development Committee with the private sector to improve the U.S. retail payment system.
One particularly promising aspect of this latter effort is a potential change in federal law to enhance the market prospects for check truncation and electronic check presentment.
Another aspect involves a data collection and research effort we now have under way, for the first time in more than twenty years, to measure accurately the aggregate number of checks paid in the United States.
G-10 Study of Financial Sector Consolidation I will turn first to financial consolidation at the international level.
Consolidation of many types of business activities has been a prominent feature of the global economic landscape for at least the past decade, and the financial sector has participated in this trend.
Indeed, we have witnessed accelerating consolidation among financial institutions over the past few years.
In September 1999, the finance ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Ten countries commissioned a major study of the possible effects of financial consolidation.
This study, which I was privileged to direct, was released to the public in January 2001.
The G-10 study had two primary objectives.
First, it attempted to isolate the effects of consolidation from those of other powerful forces transforming financial systems.
Second, it sought to identify key areas in which financial consolidation requires new policies.
The diversity of the economies involved and the interdependent nature of many of the forces affecting financial systems made achieving these objectives difficult, to say the least.
However, I believe the study was a success.
With a study of the depth, breadth, and quite frankly, the length of this one, there is always the potential to mislead by summarizing the key points in only a few words.
Nonetheless, I would like to highlight for you what are, in my judgment, the study's key findings and policy implications.
These key findings cover thirteen nations (the G-10 plus Australia and Spain).
The study documents high levels of merger and acquisition activity among financial firms during the 1990s and an increasing pace of consolidation, including a noticeable acceleration in the last three years of the decade.
Most of the consolidation has been within countries and within segments of the financial sector.
Cross-border and cross-sector consolidations have been less frequent.
Our research shows that financial consolidation substantially decreased the number of banking firms during the 1990s in almost every country studied and that national concentration of the banking industry tended to increase.
Financial consolidation has helped to create a significant number of large and, in some cases, increasingly complex, financial institutions.
These firms increasingly operate across national borders and are subject to a wide range of regulatory regimes.
As for the causes of all this merger and acquisition activity, overall, it appears that the most important forces encouraging financial consolidation are globalization of financial and nonfinancial markets, financial deregulation, improvements in information technology, and increased shareholder pressure for financial performance.
Because these forces are likely to continue, financial consolidation is likely to continue as well, although the pace may be interrupted by fluctuations in the macroeconomic cycle and other factors.
The study considered possible future scenarios but concluded that the likelihood of specific future developments is impossible to assess with confidence.
My own guess is that various patterns will emerge.
Globally active universal financial service providers will continue to develop.
We should also see the further development of firms specialized in the production of particular components of financial services or in the distribution to end-users of products obtained from specialized providers--providers that may exist within or outside the traditional financial services industry.
I fully expect a large number of efficient and profitable small and medium-sized financial institutions to remain important players in the United States.
I would guess this will also be the case in many other nations.
In addition, the uncertainties of successful post-merger integration may well favor more use of looser forms of consolidation, such as joint ventures and strategic alliances.
The data that we collected suggested a number of conclusions.
For example, financial consolidation has increased the concentration of payment and settlement flows among fewer parties.
The risk implications of consolidation in payment and settlement systems deserve close monitoring.
In addition, the study found that although consolidation has some potential to improve the operating efficiency of the combined financial institutions, and has done so in some cases, the overall evidence in favor of efficiency gains is weak.
The study also found that the effects of consolidation on competition and credit flows are very case-specific and depend on the nature of markets for specific products and services.
As I noted, this study was commissioned by finance ministers and central bank governors, so we investigated the implications of consolidation for central bank policies.
The study found that financial consolidation has not significantly affected either the conduct or the effectiveness of monetary policy.
However, it also suggests that central banks should remain alert to the implications of future consolidation-induced reductions in the competitiveness of the markets most important for monetary policy implementation.
Similarly, central banks ought to monitor potential future changes in the transmission mechanisms for monetary policy.
Importantly, the study also concluded that existing policies appear adequate to address individual firm and systemic risks now and in the intermediate term.
However, going forward, the study identifies a number of areas that deserve careful attention by policymakers.
For example, enhanced contingency planning could reduce the risks to individual firms and the broader financial system, should a large and complex financial institution become seriously distressed.
Because no institution is too big to fail, I believe that regulators should develop a clearer understanding of several key factors.
These factors include the administration of bankruptcy laws and conventions across borders; the coordination of supervisory policies within and across borders; the treatment of over-the-counter derivatives, foreign exchange, and other "market" activities in distress situations; the roles and responsibilities of managers and boards of directors; and the administration of the lender-of-last-resort function.
Our study helped to clarify the need for international attention to contingency planning.
In general, both crisis prevention and crisis management could be improved by additional communication and cooperation among central banks, finance ministries, and other financial supervisors, both domestically and internationally.
Consolidation in the U.S. Against this international background, I would like to look at what has been occurring in the United States.
In the U.S., more than 4,000 commercial banking and thrift organizations were acquired between 1990 and 2000.
The pace of merger activity generally increased between 1990 and 1998, peaking at more than 500 deals in 1998.
In 1999 and 2000, the number of mergers and acquisitions returned to the levels experienced at the start of the decade.
Partly offsetting this trend, more than 1,400 charters for new banks and thrifts were issued during the 1990s.
1998 was also the standout year in terms of transaction size.
Deals completed in that year accounted for roughly one-third of all bank and thrift assets acquired during the 1990-2000 period.
In particular, a handful of these deals were extremely large and substantially influenced the structure of the banking industry.
These transactions included Travelers-Citicorp, NationsBank-BankAmerica, Banc One-First Chicago NBD, and Norwest-Wells Fargo.
Merger size dropped somewhat in 1999 and 2000, but the average size remained large by historical standards.
Over the past decade, consolidation has had a profound effect on the structure of the banking and thrift industries.
Between 1990 and 2000, the number of commercial banking and thrift organizations decreased by one-third, from roughly 12,000 to 8,000.
This decline was driven by a sharp reduction in the number of banking and thrift organizations in the smaller asset-size categories.
For example, during this period, the number of organizations with total assets of less than $100 million fell by nearly one-half, while the number of organizations with more than $100 million in assets increased slightly.
While part of this change can be attributed to the effects of inflation on the value of firms' assets, even after controlling for inflation the number of small banking and thrift organizations declined compared with the number of larger organizations.
Mergers have also significantly influenced deposit concentration at the national level.
For example, the share of nationwide deposits managed by the 100 largest organizations grew from approximately one-half in 1990 to about two-thirds in 2000.
In spite of this increase in concentration at the national level, the typical local banking market did not experience a significant increase in concentration.
Regardless of whether we measure concentration using the share of market deposits controlled by the three largest bank or thrift organizations or using the broader Herfindahl-Hirschmann Index, we find that, on average, concentration in rural banking markets did not change and concentration in urban banking markets increased only modestly between 1990 and 2000.
The minimal effect of consolidation on local market concentration may be attributable to several factors.
First, much of the consolidation that has taken place in the U.S. over the past decade has been between banking organizations that served different geographic markets.
Second, in those instances where the merging parties did serve the same local markets, antitrust scrutiny by the Federal Reserve and the Department of Justice has limited the extent of increases in local market concentration.
Third, merging entities typically have experienced some degree of deposit runoff following merger consummation.
Finally, in many cases, new entry has helped to offset the effects of consolidation on local market concentration.
In addition to acquiring other depository institutions, banks and thrifts have engaged, to a limited extent, in cross-sector acquisitions.
In 1999, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act relaxed many of the restrictions on the financial activities of banking organizations by permitting the formation of financial holding companies-firms that could engage in a wide variety of financial activities, including commercial banking, securities underwriting, and insurance.
Contrary to many observers' expectations, the ensuing cross-sector consolidation activity has been modest so far.
Indeed, the largest cross-sector banking deal, the combination of Travelers and Citicorp, took place in 1998, before Gramm-Leach-Bliley was passed.
Check Truncation Act Now I would like to take a few minutes to talk about some of our efforts to improve the efficiency of the U.S. payments system, which is a subject of concern for all banks.
You may know that I co-chair the Payments System Development Committee with Cathy Minehan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
The PSDC was formed in mid-1999 to (1) identify strategies for enhancing the long-term efficiency of the retail payment systems, (2) identify barriers to innovation and work to eliminate or reduce those barriers where desirable or appropriate, (3) monitor developments in payments markets, and (4) conduct workshops and forums that encourage focused discussions on payments system improvements with the private sector.
It is my view that we need to approach payment system innovations with an open mind and a willingness to learn.
In a dynamic economy, markets need to play a key role in guiding the development of infrastructure.
This means that innovation and competition will be central to the future development of the payments system--as they are in other areas of the economy.
Policymakers for their part should strive to remove barriers to innovations that do not conflict with important public policies.
They should resist calls to limit competition, but rather should take every opportunity to foster competition.
Similarly, public policy should exercise restraint and resist calls for premature or short-sighted regulation.
Even well-intentioned actions may create perverse outcomes, may not effectively address longer-term public policy concerns, or may short-circuit creative innovations.
On the other hand, public policy will have to confront genuine and significant problems when these become clear and are not self-correcting.
Now let me tell you about a particularly interesting project that we have undertaken to foster payment system innovation.
Federal Reserve Board staff has been working with the financial services industry, including the ICBA, consumer representatives, and others on draft legislation to facilitate increased check truncation by reducing some of the legal impediments that exist under current law.
We hope to refer the proposal to Congress for its consideration once the draft achieves a fair balance between the interests of banks and their customers.
Under current law, the original instrument is required for presentment or return of a check, unless the parties agree to accept check information electronically.
This requirement often limits the adoption of electronic check presentment because of the difficulties of obtaining large numbers of agreements among banks and with maintaining dual processing streams for paper checks and electronic replacements.
To address these issues, a draft "Check Truncation Act" is being developed under which banks would have the option of truncating some or all of the checks they process.
The hope is that such a law would facilitate the use of electronics in the check collection and return process by empowering banks to truncate checks when cost savings or other benefits can be identified.
The truncating bank could collect or return checks by exchanging them electronically by agreement, as they can do today, or by substituting machine-readable copies of checks ("substitute checks") for the original checks.
A substitute check would consist of a printed image of the check that could be processed through check sorting equipment as though it were the original check.
The most significant aspect of the draft Check Truncation Act is its requirement that a substitute check be considered the legal equivalent of the original check for all purposes and for all parties and that banks accept the substitute check in lieu of the original check.
In particular, banks would no longer be able to demand the original check because the substitute check would be valid not only as proof of payment but also as a negotiable instrument.
The draft law would not mandate that banks truncate checks, or present checks electronically, or receive checks electronically.
Those decisions would be left to the discretion of individual banks.
As I mentioned earlier, however, the goal of the draft law would be to facilitate the use of electronics in the check collection and return process by empowering banks to truncate checks if cost savings or other benefits can be identified--in other words, when there is a good business case.
Banks that choose not to receive checks electronically would be able to continue processing checks as they do today because any substitute checks they receive would be processed like any paper check processed today.
Now, I certainly recognize the irony of the proposed act creating a new paper document--a substitute check--to promote electronics.
The legal equivalence granted to substitute checks under the draft Check Truncation Act, however, would remove the barrier to expanded electronic check processing resulting from the requirement that banks enter into extensive bilateral and multilateral agreements with other banks for electronic processing.
The draft law would allow banks greater operational flexibility and likely increase the number of banks that accept electronic checks for collection and presentment.
Our discussions with banking industry representatives have identified a number of possible operational efficiencies that banks might be able to achieve if Congress enacted this law.
For example, a depositary bank could truncate checks at the point of deposit--such as at an ATM or a remote branch--transmit the check images to a central operations center, and create substitute checks to send for collection.
This process would eliminate the cost of transporting checks daily from the points of deposit and could allow for later deposit cut-off times for their customers.
A bank could also transmit check images to an intermediary that could print substitute checks and deliver them to banks that do not accept checks electronically.
This could substantially reduce transportation costs and speed the collection or return of some checks, particularly for checks destined to geographically remote locations or for large-dollar checks.
At the other end of the check processing cycle, a paying bank could run its returned check file against its check image file to create substitute returned checks.
This process would eliminate the need for a bank to run its entire presentment from the previous day through its sorters to pull the small number of checks that need to be returned unpaid.
We believe that image-supported check truncation will become more cost effective for a growing proportion of banks as technology improves and the cost of electronic transmission declines relative to the cost of physical transportation.
Beyond operational efficiencies, the draft Act could lower the hurdles that banks now face in moving from physical to electronic processing of checks.
Today, electronic check presentment generally relies on electronic receipt of payment data contained in the MICR line of a check.
Because the MICR line includes much less information than the original check, in most cases the original paper checks follow the electronic transmission.
Collecting banks, which bear the lion's share of check collection costs are, therefore, limited in their ability to reduce costs.
Improvements in image technology, continued declines in telecommunications costs, and continued reengineering of banks' back-office processes have the potential to alter current processes.
Introducing an intermediate step of creating a substitute check that is the legal equivalent of the original check may help create conditions that are conducive to expanding the network of banks agreeing to electronic collection.
Let me emphasize again, however, that each bank must weigh its own costs and benefits and decide whether to invest in image technology, to retain a service provider to provide image-based capture and data processing services, or to stay with traditional paper processing.
Federal Reserve Payments Research I have spent the past few minutes talking about ways to reduce the cost of processing checks.
You might infer from that discussion that we have a solid idea of the total number of checks being collected.
Well, I am certain that it is a large number-our rough guess is in the range of 70 billion checks with a value well over $80 trillion per year.
But the truth is that we really do not know how many checks are written in the U.S. each year.
And, as I mentioned, the most recent survey data are more than twenty years old.
The Federal Reserve Banks have recently begun a series of surveys to address this gap and to improve their understanding of payment choices and payments processing from the perspectives of consumers, businesses, and financial institutions.
Earlier this year, the Reserve Banks engaged several research firms to conduct three surveys aimed at collecting some initial, quantitative data.
The first survey collects the volume and value of checks paid by a relatively large sample of depository institutions from which we hope to estimate the total volume and value of check payments in the U.S. A second survey will collect check-payment data from which to estimate the use of checks by broad categories of payment types.
The third survey will quantify aggregate volume and value data for various types of electronic payments.
This spring, the check surveys were sent to a sample of banks, thrift institutions, and credit unions.
Some of your institutions received a survey questionnaire.
If you have completed and returned the survey, we thank you for your help.
If you have received but not yet returned the survey, I encourage you to do so.
I believe that the estimates based on this survey data will help all of us to better understand the U.S. payment system and to better plan for the future.
Conclusion Today I have talked about several types of changes--the changes in markets for financial services due to consolidation, a possible legal change to facilitate the greater use of technology, and the changing patterns of payment instrument use over the past few decades that we hope to document through some new surveys.
Clearly, these changes will continue and even accelerate, driven by the evolution in technology and, more fundamentally, by the evolution of ideas.

The answer, of course, is quite simple: Carefully.
I'll have something more to say about this balancing act in a moment, but before I do I thought it would be fun to start out with a broader set of questions, especially given the exciting panel that is going to follow lunch.
That panel includes monetary policy committee members from the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, Canada, and the United States.
Very nice job, Diane.
So, I would like to get today's program going by posing a question to the first panel, actually a set of three interrelated questions about comparative central banking.
First, how similar or different is the practice of monetary policy across the central banks represented on the panel?
Second, if practices are different, what accounts for the differences?
And, third, what are the consequences of these differences for macroeconomic performance?
Monetary policies may, of course, appear different because the circumstances faced by central banks differ around the world.
That would especially be the case if there were important country-specific shocks.
But it could also be the case if common shocks affected countries differently because of differences in the structure of the economies, or even if initial conditions differed at the time they were hit by a common shock.
An even more interesting question, and a better lead-in to my assigned topic, is: To what extent do different central banks respond differently to the same set of circumstances?
Here's a wonderful game: Assume that the ECB governing council or the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee replaced the Federal Open Market Committee and made monetary policy in the United States--or vice versa.
How would policy outcomes and, in turn, macroeconomic performance be affected?
Comparative Central Banking Why would central banks differ in their response to a given set of economic circumstances?
Let me offer a few possibilities--some of which I hope will be explored by the next panel.
First, the central banks could have different objectives.
How similar, for example, is the U.S. dual mandate--full employment and price stability--to the singular or, more precisely, hierarchical mandates for the ECB and the Bank of England?
Under hierarchical mandates, price stability or low inflation is typically the principal objective, and other objectives can be pursued only once the inflation objective is met.
Second, there could be different strategies for achieving a given set of objectives.
Of course, the most important factor in determining monetary policy strategy is likely the nature of the objectives themselves, so any differences in strategy may be related to the first question.
At any rate, is a Taylor-rule type of approach--well aligned with a dual mandate and therefore a simple representation of the U.S. policy response--different in practice from the flexible inflation-targeting strategy of the Bank of England and the two-pillar strategy of the ECB?
If so, what are the consequences of the differences in strategy for how central banks respond to unexpected developments?
Third, what determines how effective a central bank is in meeting its objectives, given its strategy?
This takes us into the main subjects that this program will cover.
To what extent does the process followed in making monetary policy shape the details and effectiveness of the outcomes?
Does the nature of the governance and decision process matter?
For example, does it matter whether there is a single governor or a committee; whether there are outsiders as well as insiders on the committee; whether there is individual or collective responsibility for the decisions of the committee; and whether the committee is made up only of centralized members or also includes regional representatives?
Does the effectiveness of policy depend on the central bank's skill in communicating the intent behind its policy and the future direction of policy and, therefore, on the transparency of the process itself?
Does the effectiveness of the policy depend on the instrument independence of the central banks as well as the overall relationship between the central bank and the rest of government?
It is interesting to try to identify differences in practice among central banks.
But is the more meaningful story a convergence in practice around the world?
Is there any real difference between a monetary policy executed under dual mandate and under flexible inflation targeting?
If central bank practices are converging, is this due to a convergence in the economic environments or to greater acceptance of a common intellectual framework regarding what central banks can and should do as well as how those goals can be achieved?
The Politics of Monetary Policy Well I have finally reached my assigned topic--the politics of monetary policy.
I use the term to describe the relationship between the central bank and the rest of government.
In an earlier paper on this subject, I emphasized the way this relationship balances independence and accountability.
But the relationship between the central bank and the rest of government typically has four dimensions.
First, the legislature will usually limit central-bank independence by imposing a mandate--a specific set of responsibilities or objectives.
Second, the legislature will often ensure instrument independence for the central bank, thus insulating monetary policy from the short-term political pressures related to the electoral cycle.
The mandate and instrument independence usually reflect formal institutional arrangements, typically set by statute (or, in the case of the ECB, by international treaty).
Third, the central bank will typically engage the legislative and executive branches in a variety of informal interactions.
Such informal relationships may play a particularly important role in facilitating the coordination of monetary and fiscal policies and, in the case of the legislature, also allow for appropriate oversight.
Fourth, the legislature typically establishes procedures to hold the central bank accountable for its policy decisions.
As I noted in my earlier paper, instrument independence can appear inconsistent with democratic ideals.
Therefore, there is generally an attempt to balance independence and accountability.
This provides incentives for good performance and maintains the connection between the monetary policy process and publicly elected government officials.
It is important to appreciate that steps to encourage accountability typically offer opportunities for political pressure.
The history of the Federal Reserve's relationship with the rest of government is marked by efforts by the rest of government both to foster central-bank independence and to exert political pressure on monetary policy.
The Mandate Let me comment briefly on each of these relationships.
The mandate is, of course, central to the conduct of policy, or, at least, it should be.
The Fed's dual mandate--full employment and price stability--is really quite unique.
Actually, the specific language of the mandate is that the Fed should promote price stability and maximum employment.
We presume that the Congress did not intend to give us contradictory objectives, so we interpret the objectives as price stability and maximum sustainable employment.
Maximum sustainable employment is also sometimes referred to as full employment, the maximum level of employment sustainable without upward pressure on inflation.
The key to the dual mandate is that the two objectives are sought at the same time, though the relative weights are left to the discretion of the central bank.
Canada, Great Britain, and the ECB, on the other hand, all have hierarchical mandates that single out price stability as the principal objective and allow the central bank to pursue other objectives only after the price stability objective has been achieved.
Central banks operating under hierarchical mandates typically set their inflation objective in terms of a forecast or as a medium-term objective, allowing a gradual return to their objective if inflation deviates from it.
In addition, the different regimes appear to have converged over time.
It is harder to tell the difference between what Lars Svensson refers to as flexible-inflation-targeting and dual-mandate regimes.
So the question with respect to the mandate remains: Does it affect the policy outcomes and macroeconomic performance among the countries represented on the first panel?
Assuming there is no long-run trade-off between inflation and unemployment and assuming that the economy gravitates to full employment in the long run, central banks will achieve full employment and price stability in the long run under either mandate.
But the nature of the mandate could affect their choice of where their policies might put them on the trade-off between output variability and inflation variability.
Does the dual mandate make the Fed more responsive to downward demand shocks?
Does the hierarchical mandate permit Canada, Great Britain and the euro area to more tightly control inflation over the shorter run?
Or do practices among these central banks differ less than it might appear from a strict reading of their mandates?
By the way, I only have time to ask the interesting questions, not to answer them.
That will be the panel's job, I hope.
Instrument Independence Each of the central banks represented on the panel has instrument independence.
The motivation for granting such independence is to insulate the central bank from political interference, especially interference motivated by the pressure of elections to deliver short-term gains irrespective of longer-term costs.
The purpose of this insulation is not to allow the central bank to pursue whatever policy it prefers--indeed, as I just noted, governments invariably define the broad goals for the central bank--but instead to provide a credible commitment of the government, through its central bank, to achieve those goals, especially price stability.
Central bank independence is in part the result of formal institutional arrangements typically incorporated in the legislation defining and creating the central bank.
The most important requirement is that the central bank is the final authority on monetary policy decisions.
That is, monetary policy decisions should not be subject to the veto of the executive or legislative branches of government.
This is further protected if other institutions of the government--typically the Treasury Department or the Ministry of Finance--are not represented on the monetary policy committee.
A lesser protection would be to allow such representation, but only in a non-voting capacity, as is the practice at the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan.
Instrument independence is facilitated by long overlapping membership terms, by limited opportunities for reappointment, and by protecting committee members from removal, except for cause--where cause refers to fraud or other personal misconduct but explicitly excludes differences in judgment about policy.
An intangible contributor to independence is the appointment of a capable, respected, politically astute and "independent minded" chairman.
Countries have many of the same protections of instrument independence.
An interesting question, however, is whether the differences in institutional arrangements across central banks materially affect the degree of instrument independence in practice.
Do the shorter terms for members of the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee affect their degree of independence relative to the longer terms for Fed governors?
Does the presence of non-voting representatives of the executive branch on the committees in Britain and Japan lessen their effective degrees of independence compared to the United States?
Relationships in practice can be different from what they are in principle, so the independence of the central bank depends on the evolution of informal as well as formal relationships between the central bank and the rest of government.
The history of the Federal Reserve is replete with examples of attempts by presidents and senior administration officials to influence the conduct of monetary policy, especially in periods leading up to elections.
Sometimes this takes the form of appointments--including specific instructions to appointees to vote in a particular way.
Sometimes it takes the form of pressure on the chairman and occasionally on other members of the FOMC.
The Fed has--throughout this process--built a reputation for independent policymaking and has had the benefit of strong chairmen to sustain this direction.
But independence is not something that should be taken for granted.
Rather, it is a work in progress that, now and again, will have to be defended and protected.
Informal Interactions and Policy Coordination One potential tension is between independence and policy coordination.
There is a fascinating and quite famous, or infamous, episode involving the FOMC and the President in 1965.
President Johnson did not want the Administration's stimulative fiscal policy to be undermined by restrictive monetary policy.
Chairman Martin, on the other hand, supported an increase in the discount rate as an appropriate step to contain the risk of higher inflation.
A key vote on a proposed increase in the discount rate occurred at a Board meeting on December 3.
Not only did the President try to influence the Chairman's position, but others in the Administration put pressure on other members of the Board.
The Board voted 4-3 to support the Chairman.
Following the vote the President summoned the Chairman to the President's ranch in Texas.
But the vote stood.
The independence of the Fed was preserved and indeed used precisely for the purpose it was intended.
It is now widely held that raising the discount rate was the correct decision.
The minutes of that Board meeting make interesting reading.
The debate was not just about the importance of asserting the independence of the Fed.
It was also about the importance of facilitating policy coordination.
Some members of the Board were reluctant to go counter to the policy direction of the Administration, and preferred negotiation, given that the Administration also deserved a voice in stabilization policy.
The coordination of monetary and fiscal policies has not been much of an issue since at least the early 1980s.
At that time, fiscal policy shifted focus to longer-run issues--such as balancing the budget, or setting a tax policy that supports economic efficiency and long-term growth.
This left stabilization policy virtually exclusively to the Federal Reserve.
History reveals that this division of labor did not eliminate tensions over monetary policy decisions.
On many occasions, an Administration voiced its displeasure--publicly or privately--with monetary policy actions.
These communications were, as you would expect, biased--they were all in response to decisions to raise interest rates and most often occurred when those increases came shortly before an election.
The change in views about the role of tax-rate and spending adjustments as part of an activist stabilization policy significantly diminished any need for ongoing coordination between monetary and fiscal policies.
The main issues of coordination in recent years have been about how monetary policy should adapt to significant shifts in the direction of fiscal policy, which are motivated in turn by the longer-run considerations.
Recent examples include the monetary policy responses to the Clinton Administration's deficit reduction direction and, going forward, to the Bush Administration's longer-run fiscal program.
I have described this kind of coordination as sequential decisionmaking.
Fiscal policy is slower moving.
Once fiscal policy is decided upon, the Federal Reserve takes that policy into account (and/or takes into account its expectations of future fiscal policies) when it sets monetary policy.
However, if fiscal policy wanted to play a more important role in active stabilization policy, the potential for tension between the administration and the Congress and the Federal Reserve could increase, especially at times when the fiscal and monetary authorities have different views about the cyclical situation or if they have different objectives.
The relationship between the Federal Reserve and the executive branch was exceptional during the Clinton Administration.
Early indications point to a continued excellent relationship with the new Administration.
In contrast, the recent relationship between the Bank of Japan and the rest of the Japanese government seems not to have been so good.
This undoubtedly reflects in part the fact that the Bank of Japan and the Ministry of Finance are still working out their respective roles following the Bank gaining greater independence.
An interesting question, however, is whether the tensions have affected policy outcomes and macroeconomic performance.
It sometimes appears that the result has been a stalemate or the outcome of a noncooperative game.
For example, has the Bank of Japan been reluctant to engage in bolder monetization strategy in part because of differences in policy priorities and tensions with the Ministry of Finance?
The Bank of Japan seems to believe that operations in longer-term government bonds reduce the incentive of the government to move toward fiscal consolidation.
Therefore, monetary policy in Japan might be affected not only by views about how such policies would affect macroeconomic performance, for given fiscal policies, but also by views about how fiscal policy might adjust to monetary policy.
Another way to pursue more stimulative policy, even once the nominal policy rate is driven to zero, might be to carry out open market operations in foreign bonds--in effect, unsterilized foreign exchange intervention.
But foreign exchange intervention is at the discretion of the Ministry of Finance, not the Bank of Japan, so this direction might at least give the appearance of ceding control of the timing and magnitude of monetary policy actions to the Ministry of Finance.
Such an appearance would be a problem even under the best of relationships, but such a direction may be still less likely when there are tensions between the two parties and when the independence of the central bank is so recent.
Finally, the Bank of Japan may believe that there are limits to what monetary policy alone can accomplish and, given the uncertainty about the effects of monetization, may resist moving in this direction until the government moves decisively to deal with banking problems and the overhang of corporate debt and more boldly to open markets to domestic and international competition.
Coordination of monetary and fiscal policy in Europe has become much more complex, of course, because the ECB formulates a unified monetary policy, while fiscal policy still is largely determined at the national level.
Procedures Related to Accountability and Transparency Accountability is facilitated by providing the central bank with a specific, external (usually legislatively imposed) mandate.
Two aspects of designing the objectives for monetary policy are important.
First, a single objective (typically price stability)--or even a hierarchical mandate--makes the central bank more accountable, because multiple objectives always carry trade-offs, at least in the short run, that are subject to discretion by the central bank.
Second, explicit numerical targets make a central bank more accountable than more general targets.
Specifically, an explicit numerical inflation target makes central banks more accountable than a more general commitment to price stability.
The assignment of a well-articulated and tight mandate seems to be importantly related to instrument independence.
The well-articulated mandate for the Federal Reserve is a surprisingly recent development; it became part of the Federal Reserve Act only in 1977.
In this case, the timing of the mandate did not correspond to any change in the degree of independence of the Fed.
But, many recent examples exist of central banks being given tighter mandates at the same time they were given formal instrument independence.
The tight mandate leaves the most important decision--that of the goals of policy--in the political process, and it also facilitates the accountability of the newly independent central bank.
This was the case for both the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan.
Another consideration in the setting of the mandate is a trade-off between accountability and flexibility.
Flexibility can be a valuable asset for policymakers, given the variety of shocks that the economy may face, the structural changes that could affect the nature of trade-offs confronting policymakers, and the possibility of trade-offs among multiple targets.
Less precise targets and multiple objectives provide such flexibility for the policymaker.
The Federal Reserve, with both a dual mandate and a less precise inflation target, therefore appears to have greater flexibility compared to central banks that operate under singular or hierarchical mandates and have explicit, numerical inflation objectives.
Does this matter in practice?
There appears to have been some evolution in inflation-targeting regimes toward greater flexibility.
It could be that the effort to sharpen accountability through a very tight mandate was viewed as most important immediately after the granting of instrument independence.
Such tight mandates might also have been especially important at this juncture, which typically followed a period of poor inflation performance and, hence, diminished credibility with respect to price stability.
The tendency may be natural to allow more flexibility when central banks are focused on inflation maintenance than when they seek inflation reduction.
More recently, inflation performance has been generally very good and inflation-targeting regimes over time appear to have become somewhat more flexible.
Indeed, Svensson has characterized many central banks as now operating under "flexible" inflation-targeting regimes, where the flexibility allows them in practice to take account of smoothing output relative to full employment, perhaps making such regimes observationally equivalent to those operating under an explicitly dual mandate.
Is this true?
In addition, central banks can also increase their flexibility in an inflation-targeting regime by setting their objective in relation to an inflation forecast, rather than current inflation performance, or by focusing on core, as opposed to headline, inflation--directions in which inflation-targeting regimes appear to have evolved over time.
Once we allow for multiple targets and imprecisely defined objectives, the distinction between goal and instrument independence may become blurred.
Multiple targets that give central banks discretion over the relative weights to be assigned to the objectives--and hence, with respect to short-run trade-offs, between the targets--in effect give the central bank some important discretion over objectives.
Similarly, the flexibility afforded by imprecisely defined targets also leaves some discretion about goals with the central bank.
A second source of accountability is through the reappointment of committee members.
If terms are short and, especially if the chairman and the other voting members can be reappointed for additional terms, more control can be exercised through the reappointment process, and committee members can more easily be held accountable for their policy votes.
This is another clear example of the trade-off between independence (facilitated by long terms without the possibility of reappointment) and accountability (facilitated by short terms with opportunities for reappointment).
A third source of accountability is oversight hearings on monetary policy held by legislative committees.
In the United States, we have semiannual congressional monetary policy hearings--formerly known as the Humphrey-Hawkins testimony.
While many focus on the relationship between the central bank and the executive branch, central banks are typically creatures of legislatures who, in turn, control the degree of the bank's independence.
The ECB again is unique as a creature of an international treaty and its independence cannot therefore be eroded except by unanimous agreement of the signatories to that treaty.
The ECB participates in oversight hearings by the European Parliament, but that body has no authority over the Bank.
This makes the ECB, without question, the central bank with the greatest degree of instrument independence and the least degree of political accountability.
Transparency and disclosure are also essential to accountability.
The legislature, for example, needs information about the policy actions and an accounting of the rationale for the policy if it is to hold the central bank accountable.
In addition, it is generally agreed that markets work better with more complete information, though some worry that a continuous flow of information about the leanings of members of the policy committee can result in excessive volatility in financial markets.
Transparency can also contribute to policy effectiveness as well as to accountability.
Monetary policy works not only by setting the policy rate, but by conveying expectations to the markets about the future course of monetary policy.
This may be done intentionally or unintentionally, but markets will make their own attempt to assess the future direction of policy and will try to glean whatever they can from policy statements, speeches of policy committee members, and so forth.
To the extent that policymakers expect to ease or tighten in the future, conveying an expectation that policy rates will move in a given direction typically will immediately change long-term rates and asset prices in ways that support the objectives of that policy.
That is, longer-term interest rates may move sooner than would otherwise be the case, in effect reducing the lags in the effect of monetary policy on aggregate demand.
Expectations, however, can also constrain monetary policy.
If policymakers convey, perhaps unintentionally, expectations of a move at the next meeting, but policy does not in fact deliver that change, longer-term rates may reverse their earlier move.
The only way to avoid surprises is, of course, always to deliver to the markets what they expect.
And surprises are inevitable and desirable when the market gets it wrong.
But concerns about such surprises, especially at times when financial markets are skittish, may complicate the policy decision.
This tension between encouraging more effective policy by guiding private-sector expectations while, at the same time, avoiding policy being unduly affected by the very same private-sector expectations, in my view, was central to the Fed's decision in January 2000 to change the way it communicated to the market.
Before January 2000, the FOMC indicated whether policy was more likely to remain unchanged or to move in one direction or the other by its choice of a symmetrical or asymmetrical posture.
Thereafter, it communicated only its judgment about the balance of risks to the forecast.
While the latter obviously also had implications for future policy, the new approach might be viewed as a way to guide expectations while limiting the market's attaching the same degree of immediacy and certainty to expected future policy actions.
I expect that both panels that follow will discuss the transparency of central banks around the world--especially those represented on the first panel--and perhaps the degree to which this transparency contributes to the effectiveness of policy.

