The past decade or so has been marked by a remarkable surge in technological innovation and business efficiency.
This period of rapid innovation has brought with it enormous opportunities to enhance living standards for a large majority of Americans.
Our ability to take full advantage of these opportunities depends crucially on how well we as a nation can integrate these new technologies into our society.
In my remarks today, I would like to offer some perspective on the challenges created by the interaction of new technologies with the skills of the American workforce, and how the educational system has in the past and can in the future respond to these challenges.
The process of innovation is, of course, never ending.
Over the past 100 years, for example, the rate of increase of the gross domestic product of the United States, adjusted for price change, has averaged around 3 percent per year.
Yet only a fraction of that increase represents growth in the tonnage of physical materials--particularly oil, coal, wood, raw chemicals--and increases in the amount of manual labor employed in the production process.
The remainder represents new value-adding insights into how to rearrange physical materials and labor inputs to better serve human needs--in short, the conceptual content of the GDP.
The inexorably rising share of the nation’s output that is conceptual appears to have accelerated following World War II with the insights that led to the development of the transistor, microprocessor, laser, and fiber optic technologies.
By the 1990s, these and other critical innovations had fostered an enormous new capacity to capture, analyze, and disseminate information and had begun to alter significantly how we do business and create economic value, often in ways that were not foreseeable even a decade ago.
Indeed, it is the proliferation of information technology throughout the economy that makes the current period so special.
The types of skills needed to interact with the new methods of adding value associated with this diffusion of information technologies are complex.
One obviously needs a core of highly skilled workers to push the frontier of technology forward and to make the newer technologies more accessible to the rest of the workforce.
Once technology becomes more user friendly, the ability of the general workforce to create value is greatly facilitated.
What is particularly telling in this regard is how well the American economy has performed with a workforce for which the average level of education has been roughly unchanged for a quarter of a century.
As labor markets tightened in the mid-1990s, the anecdotal reports of worker shortages were worrisome.
There were numerous stories of employers going through entire lists of people before finding someone who could do the job, and widespread concerns that a lack of high-tech skills among American workers would prevent much of the population from participating fully in the economic gains associated with the emerging high-tech revolution.
Consistent with these anecdotes, in a national survey of small businesses, the percentage citing labor quality as their most important problem rose from less than 5 percent in 1993 to 20 percent by 1998.
As it turned out, however, the capacity for American businesses to absorb the less educated part of our workforce seems to have been far greater than these anecdotes implied.
The unemployment rate for adults with a high school education or less fell from 4¾ percent in 1998 to around 4 percent by the middle of last year.
And, while the proportion of small-business managers who worried about labor quality has remained elevated in the past few years, it did not increase further in spite of the decline in unemployment.
One explanation for this phenomenon is the often-observed multiplier effects of technological breakthroughs.
For example, as engineers and programmers have developed increasingly more sophisticated hardware and software, the vast productive benefits of computers have become far more readily available to the average worker in recent years.
Looking back a number of decades to the early stages of the information technology revolution, we can see that COBOL and Fortran were the “visas” into the world of technology.
Those workers without very sophisticated programming skills could not interface with the new computer-driven technologies and thus often could not take advantage of the potential productivity improvements associated with those technologies.
But today’s increasingly user-friendly software has enabled workers with far less education and skills to engender value added from new technologies that their older brothers and sisters could not have foreseen a half generation earlier.
In particular, we are finding that despite the awesome capabilities of our newer innovations, there are certain skills inherent in all human beings that technology cannot replicate.
Low-skilled workers in decades past had to rely principally on their manual labor skills to create value added.
Today, the newer technologies give similarly skilled workers the opportunity to vastly multiply their value-producing capabilities by leveraging their ability to identify and classify.
For example, retail sales clerks not only facilitate sales in the conventional manner, but also automatically engender books of account, inventory control, and supplier reorders.
But, while software has increased our capacity to integrate lower-skilled individuals into the workforce, the rapidity and unpredictability of innovation also imply a need to strengthen those cognitive skills of our overall workforce.
An increasing proportion of the workforce must be equipped not simply with technical know-how, but also with the ability to create, analyze, and transform information and to effectively interact electronically with others.
Moreover, learning will increasingly need to be a lifelong activity.
The days when a high school or college education would serve a graduate throughout his or her working career are gone.
Today's recipients of diplomas should expect to have many jobs and to acquire and use an ever-expanding range of skills over their working lives.
It may not seem credible that an educational system shown by many studies to stifle learning between the fourth and twelfth grades relative to the systems of our foreign trading partners can provide our workforce with the necessary intellectual tools going forward.
But, while such studies suggest there is much to be done, there also are reasons to be optimistic.
In the past, our educational system, defined in its widest sense, has been guided importantly by the marketplace toward the broader needs of our economy.
Indeed, the history of education in the United States traces a path heavily influenced by two themes: the need for a workforce with the skills required to interact productively with the evolving economic structure, and a thirst for knowledge among the American people.
The educational system during the early years of the United States was far less formalized than today.
There were, of course, grammar schools and colleges that catered to the wealthier segments of society.
But most individuals had little access to more than a minimal level of formal schooling because they were needed to work on the farm.
In 1800, for example, more than 90 percent of Americans lived on farms.
Yet, our ancestors understood the value of education, and less formal arrangements were frequently used; home-based schooling, private tutors, and church-sponsored Sunday schools are just a few examples.
The one-room schoolhouse on the prairie still provokes a remarkable, though perhaps not wholly justified, degree of nostalgia.
People felt that once a child learned how to read and write, an unlimited world opened up.
The focus in those early years was thus often on increasing literacy--beyond that, children were expected to read books to satisfy their interest in other subjects such as science or philosophy.
In this sense, the inquisitive nature of the people of that time drove the need to know beyond the measures of formal education in those early years.
Evidence of our ancestors’ intellectual capacity and desire to acquire a broader education are abundant.
Abraham Lincoln, for example, had little formal education while a young child, but once taught how to read by his mother, he read voraciously in a wide range of subjects.
And one can only marvel at the letters that twenty-year-old soldiers sent back home in the Civil War.
They were remarkably thoughtful and literate.
These soldiers, presumably with little formal education, were obviously reasonably well read.
They did have the advantage, of course, of a world without television.
Early in the twentieth century, advances in technology began to require workers with a higher level of cognitive skills, for instance the ability to read manuals, to interpret blueprints, or to understand formulas.
Our market-driven educational system responded: In the 1920s and 1930s, high school enrollment in this country expanded rapidly, pulling youth from rural areas, where opportunities were limited, into more productive occupations in business and broadening the skills of students to meet the needs of an advancing manufacturing sector.
At the same time, our system of higher education was also responding to the advances in economic processes.
Although many states had established land grant schools earlier, support for these schools accelerated in the late nineteenth century as institutions located in states that specialized in agriculture and mining sought to take advantage of new scientific methods of production.
A century ago, the content of education at an American college had evolved from a classically based curriculum to one combining the sciences, empirical studies, and modern liberal arts.
Universities responded to the need for the application of science--particularly chemistry and physics--to the manufacture of steel, rubber, chemicals, drugs, petroleum, and other goods requiring the newer production technologies.
Communities looked to their institutions of higher learning for leadership in scientific knowledge and for training of professionals such as teachers and engineers.
During this time, the scale and scope of higher education in America was shaped by the recognition that research--the creation of knowledge--complemented teaching and training--the diffusion of knowledge.
In broad terms, the basic structure of higher education remains much the same today, and it has been one that has proven sufficiently flexible to respond to the needs of a changing economy.
Certainly, if we are to remain preeminent in transforming knowledge into economic value, the U.S. system of higher education must remain the world leader in generating scientific and technological breakthroughs and in preparing workers to meet the evolving demands for skilled labor.
However, the pressure to enable all workers to benefit from the new technologies also requires that we strengthen the significant contributions of other types of training and educational programs, especially for those with lesser skills.
The notion that formal degree programs at any scholastic level or that any other training program established today can be crafted to fully support the requirements of one’s full working life has become subject to increasing doubt.
It is evident that we need to foster a flexible education system--one that integrates work and training and that serves the needs both of experienced workers at different stages in their careers and of students embarking on their initial course of study.
Community colleges, for example, have become important providers of job skills training not just for students who may eventually move on to a four-year college or university but for individuals with jobs--particularly workers seeking to retool, retrain, or simply to broaden their skills.
The increasing availability of courses that can be taken “at a distance” over the Internet means that learning can more easily occur outside the workplace or the classroom.
Economists have long argued that a significant proportion of the work knowledge that one acquires in a lifetime is produced on the job.
Several decades ago much of that on-the-job training was acquired through work experience.
Today, businesses and labor unions are placing greater emphasis on the value of formal education and training programs--ranging from corporate universities to partnerships with community colleges and other providers--as well as relationships with public agencies, including welfare-to-work and school-to-work programs.
These efforts recognize that technologically advanced learning must be grounded in real-world curriculums that are relevant to changing business needs and that it be provided in flexible venues that open access to development of skills to as many workers as possible.
Meeting the complex range of skills likely to be required of our workforce in the future presents a significant challenge to our educational system.
But it is a challenge we cannot afford to ignore.

Today I want to switch gears and talk about how important it is for individuals to save, focusing particularly on low- and moderate-income households.
In the process I will summarize some important lessons from recent research, largely done at the Federal Reserve.
Saving can be difficult, but it is vital to the financial security and future living standards of individuals and families.
For low- and moderate-income households, it can be particularly difficult to set aside funds for the future.
Households of modest means have barely enough money to meet their day-to-day needs, and may not have access to programs that subsidize saving, such as employer-provided pensions.
They may also be relatively untutored in financial matters.
From the Flow of Funds Accounts produced by the Fed, we know that overall household wealth nearly doubled over the past decade, from less than $21 trillion at the end of 1990 to about $40 trillion at the beginning of this year.
By definition, this gain in household wealth can be decomposed into its two sources: capital gains and saving.
About 80 percent of the increase in wealth over the past decade was attributable to capital gains, only 20 percent to saving.
A large portion of household capital gains was in turn due to the strong performance of the stock market.
But households also saw increases in the value of some other assets; in particular the value of their houses increased by about 50 percent.
To disaggregate this total by income group, we need to look at the Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), a survey of about 4,000 households that has been undertaken by the Fed every three years since 1983.
As you will see, this survey produces, and has produced, very important information on the financial circumstances of different types of households.
Surveys are going into the field again this month and, if I could be forgiven a bit of advertising, we hope you will be willing to participate if asked.
The SCF shows that as a general matter, low- and moderate-income households did not fully participate in this phenomenal gain in overall wealth.
To share in the wealth created by the stock market boom, a household had to own some stocks.
Unfortunately, low- and moderate-income households own relatively few financial assets, and even fewer stocks.
The most recent SCF indicates that the typical low-income household--defined here as having an annual income of less than $10,000--had only a little more than $1,000 in financial assets; and the typical moderate-income household--a household with income between $10,000 and $25,000--had less than $5,000 in financial assets.
Moreover, what little they had was often invested in liquid form, such as checking accounts, that provide only interest returns, not capital gains.
Participation in the stock market has become significantly broader over the past decade.
About 50 percent of all households currently own stocks either directly or indirectly through a mutual fund or retirement account.
But less than 25 percent of moderate-income households, and less than 10 percent of low-income households, own stocks directly or indirectly.
On a brighter note, the stock ownership rates for low- and moderate-income households are beginning to pick up.
Ownership rates in 1998 were about two and a half times greater than they were in 1989, when virtually no low-income households held stock and only 13 percent of moderate-income households held stock.
Even though they still lag far behind the ownership rates of higher-income households, stock ownership rates have been rising for low-income households at a faster rate than for higher-income households.
This means that wealth disparities could start to narrow as low- and moderate-income households begin to participate in the processes that have greatly improved living standards for high-income households.
Low- and moderate-income households also have been poorly positioned to benefit from the rise in house prices over the past decade.
Two-thirds of all American households now own their own homes, but only about one-third of low-income households and a little more than half of moderate-income households do.
These lower homeownership rates in large part reflect the difficulty faced by households of moderate means in saving for the down payment necessary to get a mortgage.
Why Save?
A key reason for saving is the point I just made--it is an important vehicle for accumulating wealth.
But it also is important to save for financial uncertainties and retirement.
Saving provides some measure of financial security in case of a lost job or unexpected necessary expenditures, such as for uninsured medical treatment.
Poor households do not appear to have adequate resources to cover unexpected financial crises.
Most financial advisers suggest that households should have accumulated savings equal to six to nine months of income in order to be prepared for such crises.
However, the typical low-income household has financial assets equal to only about two months of income, and the typical moderate-income household only to about three months of income.
Moreover, about one-third of low-income households, and more than one-tenth of moderate-income households, report having no financial assets at all.
These households are living from paycheck to paycheck with no financial cushion of their own for rough times.
An even more important reason to save is to prepare for retirement.
An obvious question is how much retirement saving is enough?
While the answer to this question differs depending on a family's financial circumstances, as a rule of thumb financial advisers estimate that it takes about 75 percent of a family's pre-retirement income to maintain its standard of living in retirement.
Households can live at the same level with only 75 percent of pre-retirement income because of reductions in the typical family size, in payroll taxes owed, and in job-related expenses, such as commuting and clothing costs.
In addition, when households pay off the mortgages on their homes, they can consume the same level of housing services with significantly less income.
For low- and moderate-income households, the news is mixed.
On the one hand, Social Security alone replaces up to half of pre-retirement income for many low- and moderate-income families, bringing them about two-thirds of the way toward the 75 percent goal.
In these cases, households must save enough to replace about 25 percent of their pre-retirement income.
However, some low- and moderate-income households will have to save more than this because they had only intermittent spells of employment, which means that Social Security will not replace as much of their pre-retirement income.
Low- and moderate-income households' more tenuous attachment to employers is also a reason that they are less likely to be eligible for a pension.
The SCF shows that more than half of all workers younger than sixty-five are covered by a pension from their job, but these rates of eligibility are much lower for households with below-average incomes.
Only about 13 percent of workers in low-income households and about 25 percent of moderate-income households are eligible for pensions sponsored by their employers.
This evidence suggests that many low- and moderate-income households are not saving enough to accumulate the kind of retirement wealth that would allow them to maintain their pre-retirement standard of living.
But while many households are not on track to accumulate adequate wealth for retirement, they are within striking distance if they change their behavior and begin to save.
For example, the SCF indicates that low-income households typically have net worth equal to a little more than one-half of their income but will need to accumulate net worth of between one and one-fourth and three and one-half times their income by the time they retire in order to maintain their standard of living in retirement.
Likewise, moderate-income households typically have net worth of about one and a half times their income, and will need to accumulate wealth of about one and three-fourths to three and one-half times their income wealth to reach their retirement savings goals.
It is not easy for households struggling to pay bills every month to also set aside enough funds to ensure a reasonable degree of financial security during retirement.
But some important tax-preferred saving vehicles can help.
One that has been available to all working households for the last twenty years is the individual retirement account (IRA).
IRAs encourage saving by allowing tax-deductible contributions and tax-deferred accumulation of all returns on assets.
With normal saving assets, the saving is not tax deductible and the returns are taxed as they are earned.
With IRAs, taxes are postponed until the asset is cashed in, which means that the asset income accrues tax-free.
Despite this tax advantage, relatively few low- and moderate-income households make any contributions to IRAs.
This low participation rate can be partly explained by the fact that households with modest means save very little in any form, and by the fact that the tax benefits of IRAs are not as large for those in low tax brackets.
However, a lack of awareness of IRAs could also contribute to the low participation rate.
To the extent that this is true, financial education could help increase awareness and promote saving.
A potentially even more important vehicle for retirement saving is the 401(k)-type pension plan.
Such plans allow eligible workers to contribute to retirement accounts on a before-tax basis and receive tax-deferred accrual of asset returns, just as with IRAs.
But unlike IRA contributions, 401(k) account contributions are often matched by the employer, providing a huge boost to retirement saving.
Workers are eligible for 401(k) plans only if their employer sponsors one, and modest-wage workers are less likely than others to work for such employers.
Nevertheless, eligibility for 401(k)-type plans has expanded over the past decade.
Increases in eligibility were greater for higher-income workers, but eligibility among low-income workers also rose slightly from 9 percent in 1989 to 10 percent in 1998.
Eligibility among moderate-income workers rose from 18 percent in 1989 to 21 percent in 1998.
While eligibility for 401(k) plans has increased among lower-income workers, participation is still low.
Among workers who are eligible to participate in a 401(k) plan, lower-wage workers participate much less than higher-wage workers, and lower-wage workers who do participate contribute a smaller percentage of their income.
This is a discouraging response to both the tax subsidy and the employer match.
Because of these subsidies, participation in 401(k) plans by lower-wage households could significantly raise the wealth of households with modest means.
It is time to redouble our efforts to promote saving for retirement by low- and moderate-income households through tax-advantaged savings plans that are available to them, such as IRAs and 401(k)s. Financial Education The low participation rates for 401(k)s and IRAs may appear to be something of a puzzle in light of the strong financial incentives they provide to encourage saving.
The logical inference is that financial incentives alone are not enough to induce saving.
People have to know about these programs, understand how they work, and understand their benefits to make sound financial decisions for their future.
That is, education is a critical complement to financial incentives in promoting saving.
To the extent that inadequate savings are the result of a failure to recognize inherent economic risks, financial education can help supply the knowledge and specific skills required to plan for the future.
Financial education can also provide the "how-to" knowledge needed to open a checking account or shop effectively for a mortgage.
Indeed, there is compelling evidence that financial education matters.
Recent research published in the Journal of Public Economics has found that high school students who received instruction on financial decisionmaking--including budgeting, credit management, and saving and investing--had significantly higher levels of wealth in adulthood than others.
Being a well-informed consumer also matters.
Most people are aware that well-informed consumers can save significant amounts of money when buying big-ticket items like cars.
But it is just as important to shop around for the best terms on a loan to finance the car.
Unfortunately, this shopping around may take some effort and require some diligence in working through the fine print.
For example, a credit card offer that arrives in the mail promising a 1 percent annual percentage rate should probably be scrutinized for the catch.
Credit card solicitations should be evaluated and compared for interest rates, annual fees, and late charges.
Just as it is important to understand the terms of credit cards and household loans, it is also important to shop around for the best return on saving.
Not all checking accounts are created equally, and it pays to shop around to find the account with the lowest fees and the highest interest rate.
This advice also applies to the choice between opening a checking account and using check- cashing outlets to meet payment needs.
Check-cashing outlets can be significantly more expensive than checking accounts at banks for the typical low-income household.
Households that use check-cashing outlets to meet their payment needs spend up to three times as much per year to conduct their financial transactions as households that use checking accounts.
Nevertheless, evidence from the SCF shows that 40 percent of low-income households did not have a checking account in 1998.
We clearly have work to do to educate consumers about the actual costs of alternative ways to meet their cash management needs.
We at the Fed are dedicated to promoting financial literacy and making it easier for people to be smart consumers.
To advance these goals, the Fed is represented on the board of the Jump Start Coalition, which seeks to encourage financial literacy among young adults by promoting the teaching of financial literacy courses in schools.
The Fed also has issued regulations that make it easier for consumers to compare financial products.
For example, truth-in-lending laws dictate that credit card companies must disclose the terms of the credit in plain and standard language.
And there are special consumer protections for cases when homes are used as collateral for loans.
A significant aspect of being a smart consumer is being a smart borrower.
As is well-known, predatory lending--lending on terms unfavorable to consumers and not fully understood by consumers--has lately become a growing problem.
The problem is not high interest rates as such; the problem arises when consumers do not understand the full implications of high interest rates and other loan terms.
The Fed has conducted four hearings on predatory lending, and has proposed regulatory changes that tighten some restrictions.
With our twelve Reserve Banks, we have also produced a number of articles, brochures, videotapes, and web sites to promote understanding and combat undesirable lending practices.
The goal is to help people become informed borrowers, informed consumers, and informed savers.
Conclusion Overall, there is some good news and some bad news about the saving habits of low- and moderate-income households.
On the bad side, low- and moderate-income households have less wealth, and benefit from capital gains, than do other households.
On the good side, low- and moderate-income saving and wealth-owning rates are picking up, and low-income households are beginning to participate in the wealth-building process that has dramatically improved the lot of other Americans.

