These remarkable developments have attracted considerable attention from economists and from macroeconomic policymakers.
At the same time, movements in the prices of some other assets in the economy--changes in house prices, for example--have been steadier, less dramatic, but perhaps no less significant.
There can be little doubt that sizable swings in the market values of business and household assets have created important challenges for policymakers.
After having been relatively stable for a number of decades, the aggregate ratio of household net worth to income rose steeply over the second half of the 1990s and reached an unprecedented level by early last year.
That ratio has subsequently retraced some of its earlier gains.
But we must ask whether the aggregate ratio of net worth to income is a sufficient statistic for summarizing the effect of capital gains on economic behavior or, alternatively, whether the distribution of capital gains across assets and the manner in which those gains are realized also are significant determinants of spending.
To answer these questions, we need far more information than we currently possess about the nature and the sources of capital gains and the interaction of these gains with credit markets and consumer behavior.
Analysts have long factored changing asset values into models that seek to explain consumption and investment.
Indeed, in recent years, household wealth variables have become increasingly important quantitatively in endeavors to track consumer spending.
The importance of household balance sheet variables for explaining consumption and the possibility that not all these variables influence spending identically suggest the need for greater disaggregation than is typically employed in most models.
Observing that, over the past half century, consumer spending has amounted to about 90 percent of income, it might appear that income is largely sufficient to explain consumption.
However, econometric evidence suggests that such numbers may be deceptive.
Wealth by itself now appears to explain about one-fifth of the total level of consumer outlays, according to the Board's large-scale econometric model, leaving disposable income and other factors to explain only four-fifths of consumption.
Indeed, if capital gains have any effect on consumption, the propensity of households to spend out of income must be less, possibly much less, than 90 percent.
If income and wealth moved tightly together over time, the distinction between them might not be meaningful for predicting the future path of consumption.
And, over very long periods of time, capital gains on physical assets are not independent of the trends in disposable income.
But the relationship of wealth to income is demonstrably not stable over time spans relevant for the conduct of policy.
As a consequence, a statistical system that augments income as a determinant of consumer spending with information about wealth can significantly assist our understanding of this key economic relationship.
Conventional regression analysis suggests that a permanent one-dollar increase in the level of household wealth raises the annual level of personal consumption expenditures approximately 3 to 5 cents after due consideration of lags.
Arguably, it would not be important to draw distinctions among various types of wealth if all assets were engendering similar rates of capital gains.
Owing to collinearity in such instances, all wealth proxies would produce similar estimates of overall wealth effects on consumer spending.
At times, however, the rates of change in key asset prices have diverged.
For example, over the past year and a half, home values have appreciated, whereas equity values have contracted significantly.
In such circumstances, differences in the propensities to consume out of the capital gains and losses on different types of assets could have significant implications for aggregate demand.
Assuming that the underlying propensities are, in fact, stable and given enough time-series data with sufficient variation, standard regression procedures should be able to extract reasonably robust estimates of any differential in spending propensities--for example, out of stock market wealth and home wealth.
But, in practice, these circumstances do not prevail.
As a consequence, we at the Federal Reserve Board are in the process of developing balance-sheet disaggregations that should help us infer the propensities to spend out of capital gains across different classes of assets.
In carrying out this analysis, we have been especially mindful of the possibility that the amount by which a capital gain affects spending may well be a function of whether or not the gain has been realized.
On the buyer's side, when an asset is transferred, the acquisition cost is its new book value and, by definition, its market value.
On the seller's side, the proceeds from the sale are available for asset accumulation, debt repayment, and consumption.
In this way, a capital gain is realized and made liquid, with the potential to affect spending, assets, or debt.
The capital gain in the process disappears as an element in the householder's balance sheet.
Unrealized gains, to be sure, can be borrowed against, and the proceeds of the loan can be spent or used for repayment of other debt.
Alternatively, the unrealized gain could induce households to finance additional outlays by selling other assets or by reducing their saving out of current income.
But unless, or until, this gain is realized or is extinguished by a fall in market price, it will remain on the asset side of the householder's balance sheet, exposed to price change and uncertainty.
Equity extraction through realized gains creates liquid funds with certain value.
Indeed, a significant proportion of sellers do not purchase another home.
In contrast, extraction of unrealized gains does not reduce the householders' uncertainty about their net worth or their exposure to market price changes.
This suggests that the propensity to spend out of realized gains is likely to be greater than the propensity to spend out of unrealized gains.
Although our asset-class analysis of detailed disaggregated data is still at an early stage, preliminary examination finds that the data are consistent with the hypothesis of differential spending propensities by asset type and by whether or not capital gains have been realized.
For example, purchasers of existing homes, on average, appear to take out mortgages about twice the size of the unamortized mortgage that the typical seller cancels on sale.
After accounting for closing expenses, the remaining unencumbered cash is available for debt repayment, acquisition of financial and nonfinancial assets, and spending.
We have no direct evidence, of which I am aware, on the way that such funds are used.
However, we can make use of several surveys that have explored how cash-outs associated with mortgage refinancing and home equity loans are expended.
Typically, these surveys indicate that households allocate so-called cash-outs--that is, the amount by which a refinanced mortgage exceeds the pre-refinanced outstanding debt--to repayment of nonmortgage debt, acquisition of financial assets, outlays for home improvement, and personal consumption expenditures in roughly equal proportions.
Our interest, of course, is primarily on spending; extracting home equity to repay debt or to purchase financial assets merely reshuffles balance sheets and, at least immediately, does little to affect economic activity.
If these survey results are taken at face value and are applied to the case in which the home changes hands--as distinct from, say, a refinancing-- the amount of personal consumption expenditures generated from realized capital gains on the sale of homes, financed through the mortgage market, represents approximately 10 to 15 cents on the dollar.
1 Of course, in addition to realized capital gains from the turnover of existing homes, there is a considerable amount of cash that is extracted from home equity without a home sale, principally from refinancing cash-outs and from home equity loans.
Both types of equity extraction have risen considerably in recent years, in line with the marked rise in unrealized capital gains on homes.
Some preliminary calculations suggest that the total of equity extractions from unrealized capital gains on homes that is spent on consumer goods and services per dollar of capital gains is a fraction of the spending engendered by the gains realized through the sale of a home.
2 3 This difference occurs, to a large extent, because the net extraction of equity is much higher among homes that have turned over than among those that have not.
While data on home mortgage debt and house turnover can be used to analyze the particular channels through which capital gains on homes spur consumer outlays, the financing linkages between stock market capital gains and consumer spending are less clear.
Homeowners typically own one home, which they hold, on average, for nearly a decade.
Financing is almost exclusively through the mortgage market, and equity extractions for spending, accordingly, are readily identified.
Stocks, in contrast, tend to be held in portfolios that have far greater rates of turnover than homes, and financing sources are much more diverse and changeable.
Moreover, although gains in defined contribution plans, IRAs, and other tax-deferred accounts almost surely affect consumer spending, the complicated tax treatment and restrictions on the use of those funds make the connections between capital gains in these accounts and spending quite indirect.
Nonetheless, even setting aside all pension-type assets, household capital gains on directly held equities and mutual funds in recent years have been two to four times the size of overall gains on homes.
The sheer size of such gains suggests that capital gains on equities have been a more potent factor in determining spending than gains on homes.
In fact, if we accept a total net wealth effect on consumption of 3 to 5 cents on the dollar, and if further analysis supports the larger net spending propensities from capital gains on homes suggested by mortgage and survey data, then the propensity to spend out of each dollar of stock market gains would be less than the propensity to spend out of a dollar from gains on homes, but still larger in overall dollar magnitude.
Of course, these quantitative magnitudes are tentative, and a great deal of additional work will be necessary to better understand and to confirm the nature and magnitudes of the relationships between capital gains on houses and stocks--realized and unrealized--and consumer spending.
* * * No matter how one differentiates the effects on consumer spending of capital gains on stock market and housing wealth, it is clear that the massive increase in capital values over the past five years had a profound impact on output and income.
The influence of capital gains on economic behavior also is likely to be of substantial consequence for the prospective performance of the economy.
That influence also can be seen in our national income and product accounts (NIPA).
By design, these accounts measure the market value of the output of goods and services and its distribution to the factors of production.
As such, they exclude capital gains and losses.
This exclusion is especially relevant for personal saving, where our accounting conventions result in capital gains having a large effect on the published figures.
In part, the reason is that the NIPA deduct taxes paid on realized capital gains from personal income and treat them, in effect, as a transfer to the government sector, even though the capital gains that generated those taxes are excluded from income.
4 This issue is not trivial.
As best we can determine, of the 4.6 percentage point decline in the personal saving rate between 1995 and 2000, a full percentage point is attributable to the increase in federal and state capital gains taxes paid over that period.
Capital gains have also significantly influenced the measured personal saving rate as a result of the NIPA treatment of the pension fund sector.
In particular, because defined-benefit pensions are considered part of the "personal sector," employer contributions to such plans are included in disposable income, as are the interest, dividend, and rental incomes received by these plans.
In contrast, benefit payments to individuals are not part of personal income because they are considered intrasectoral transfers.
Neither households nor corporations, however, are likely to view their own financial activities in that manner.
Surely, for defined-benefit pensions, it is the benefit payments to retirees rather than the employer inflows into the pension sector that individuals perceive as personal income.
For their part, businesses have often viewed defined-benefit pension plans, in effect, as business-sector profit centers because capital gains affect corporate defined-benefit pension contributions and, hence, earnings.
This consideration is relevant in the measurement and interpretation of the personal saving rate.
In recent years, contributions to private defined-benefit plans have declined significantly as an increasing part of these plans' accrued benefit liabilities have been met through a rise in the market value of their equity holdings.
Offsetting this decline, to some extent, has been an increase in dividend and other capital income.
If private and state and local defined-benefit pension plans had been separated from the personal sector, the personal saving rate would have fallen about 3/4 percentage point less from 1995 to 2000, all else being equal.
All told, if households viewed taxes on capital gains as a subtraction from those gains and not from income and, further, if households viewed benefit payments received from defined-benefit plans as income rather than their employers' contributions (as well as the investment income of the plans), perceived disposable income in 2000 would have been higher as would the personal saving rate.
In short, roughly two-fifths of the measured decline in the personal saving rate since 1995 reflects the foregoing NIPA income-accounting conventions.
I should emphasize that any accounting adjustments made to personal saving because of changes in the definition of disposable income are exactly offset in business and government saving so that national saving is unaffected.
The increment to personal saving associated with a treatment of the private defined-benefit pension sector as a business profit center would be offset by a decline in corporate profits and business saving.
In addition, a designation of taxes on capital gains as capital transfers (in a manner similar to estate and gift taxes) would raise measured personal saving and lower overall tax receipts and, hence, government saving.
5 Thus, while total national saving would be unaffected by these specific accounting adjustments for capital gains, the distribution of NIPA saving among households, businesses, and governments would be significantly influenced.
One must recognize that no single way to array information on income, production, and capital gains is best.
The particular array employed depends on the specific purposes to which the data set is to be applied.
The treatment of capital gains in the NIPA, for example, is intended to allow the accounts to most accurately attribute national saving to the various sectors in the accounts.
Indeed, when that is the objective, the removal of capital gains is essential.
For analysis of issues related to consumer spending, though, the NIPA personal saving rate presents an incomplete picture of the financial state of the household sector in the aggregate, and an adjustment along the lines previously suggested may be informative.
In addition to the effect of income-accounting conventions, of course, we must consider the real economy influence of capital gains on the level of consumption.
The estimates of the effect of household capital gains on consumer spending of 3 to 5 cents on the dollar suggest that, directly and indirectly, capital gains easily account for the remainder of the measured five-year decline in the saving rate.
Obviously, this is not to say that had asset prices been flat for an extended period the personal saving rate would have been unchanged, on net, over the past five years.
If asset prices had not risen, real incomes would surely have been altered, and the vast array of secondary and tertiary effects of asset-price changes would have been different.
Nonetheless, this exercise fosters additional important insights into the dynamics of household behavior and the relationships among asset prices, income, and consumption.
The complexity of these relationships underscores the potential usefulness of developing separate sets of accounts to track capital gains.
These accounts could supplement the income and product accounts, the flow of funds accounts, and the balance of payments accounts.
The last two currently exhibit, in part, the effect of capital gains and can be separated into special accounts.
A supplementary set of detailed tables on capital gains exclusions from the national income and product accounts also would be a useful addition to our overall system of economic accounts.
* * * This morning I have not endeavored to discuss the effects of capital gains, other than peripherally, on investment in plant and equipment, home improvement, tax revenues, and government surpluses, and their obvious significance in tracking international economic flows.
Clearly, these also are relevant to any evaluation of macroeconomic events and warrant further study.
* * * In closing, accounting systems are not ends in themselves.
We construct them because they have a function in aiding our understanding of some particular aspect of a business operation at a company level or for an economy as a whole.
As we endeavor to better understand how changes in the level and composition of wealth affect economic behavior, new accounting systems may be required to supplement those that have long served us so well.
Technology has facilitated the production of information at a far faster rate than at any time in the past.
But in the information economy, it remains up to us to organize and use that information in ways that improve the quality of decision making.
Footnotes 1.
The realized capital gain on a home sale in recent years has engendered a net increase in the mortgage debt (that is, net equity extraction) on that home averaging nine-tenths of the capital gain.
Of the net equity extraction, almost half has been expended on closing and related expenses.
The remainder, we assume, is distributed as indicated by the consumer surveys.
Return to text 2.
However, the consumption financed through mortgage debt extension somewhat overestimates the net influence of housing capital gains on consumption.
Debt must be repaid, and presumably, consumption is reduced as a consequence of the repayment.
In the absence of capital gains, borrowing merely moves up a purchase rather than augmenting total purchases through time.
However, in the presence of increased capital gains, unrealized but still perceived as permanent, debt capacity and levels are likely to rise.
The consequently lowered debt repayment relative to debt extensions suggests that the rate of offset to the initial consumption expenditures at the time of repayment is also likely to be a good deal less.
Our preliminary estimates, in fact, suggest that such subtractions from the gross effects on spending are modest.
Return to text 3.
The time sequence of the emergence of capital gains and their effect on consumer spending is a function of the channel through which equity is extracted from homes.
For sales of existing homes, equity extraction is generally concurrent with a realization of a capital gain.
Presumably, however, the cash extracted influences consumer spending only over time.
Unrealized gains can build up over time without any obvious effect on spending.
But a cash-out refinancing or a home equity loan is presumably initiated for a specific current purpose.
Thus, the lags between the emergence of a capital gain and spending may be a function of the degree of gains realization and the particular mortgage vehicle employed for equity extraction.
Another means of equity extraction of unrealized gains for which data are scarce outside of decennial censuses are long-term first lien mortgages on residences previously free of debt.
Return to text 4.
Capital gains, however, have not been fully stripped from personal income.
The capital gains embedded in exercised stock options, for example, are included in compensation of employees (and as a charge against profits) in the NIPA.
These gains are taxed as regular income.

My colleagues in Kansas City deserve thanks for again having arranged a stimulating program.
I will begin by discussing some issues that relate directly to the paper by D'Avolio, Gildor, and Shleifer.
I will then offer some broader comments on the actual or potential effects of information technology in markets for financial services.
This paper fits into the large literature on the economics of imperfect information.
This line of research has generated important insights concerning economic behavior and the functioning of markets, showing in particular that imperfect information can lead to outcomes that are distinctly less favorable than those under complete information.
Andrei Shleifer (with many co-authors) has been a leading contributor to this field.
The current paper argues that advances in information and communication technology have improved the functioning of financial markets in many ways but that this technology also has a dark side that may harm market efficiency.
This concern centers on the stock market and reflects the following argument.
Improvements in information technology--most notably, the rapid growth of the Internet--have made participating in the market much easier and cheaper and, as a result, the market has drawn in many new and unsophisticated investors.
These "noise traders" cannot differentiate between accurate and distorted information about a given company.
Thus, company managers see greater opportunity to boost their firm's stock price by fooling investors through the release of distorted information--and have a strong incentive to do so because of the shift toward stock-based compensation and the widespread use of equity financing in the "new economy."
In the end, according to the paper, more information is available, but its quality has deteriorated, which reduces the benefit from information technology for market efficiency.
Because the incentive to produce distorted information is so strong, the authors doubt that market mechanisms alone can correct the problem.
They advocate a two-pronged strategy of enhanced disclosure requirements and investor education to improve market efficiency.
These recommendations are very sensible.
The emphasis on disclosure has long been a cornerstone of the regulatory framework in the United States, and it lies behind recent initiatives at the SEC to combat what the commission views as a variety of conflicts of interest that threaten the integrity of our financial markets.
The authors' other recommendation--greater education of investors--is also important, especially given the broadening participation in financial markets.
The Federal Reserve, along with other government agencies, is working to promote financial literacy in several ways--by issuing regulations that make comparing financial products easier, by producing educational materials for the public, and by supporting private-sector initiatives, such as programs that design and disseminate course materials for use in schools.
Although I certainly concur with the policy recommendations in the paper, I have some suggestions for tightening the analysis that lies behind those recommendations.
For example, the paper implies that financial disclosure is generally weaker than in the past, and uses the media focus on pro forma accounting as one proof of the increasing weakness of financial disclosure.
Increases in pro forma disclosures do not necessarily imply that misleading information is always being disclosed.
While the authors demonstrate that, in a small number of firms, earnings from pro forma numbers are high relative to GAAP earnings, it is not clear from the paper how severe a problem exists with regard to these disclosures.
Similarly, while the paper attempts to show that earnings management can fool the market, virtually all the evidence is based on data from the 1970s, 1980s, and early 1990s, and thus it may not be relevant for the later years.
Moreover, the analysis of more recent effects of earnings distortions tends to be loose.
For example, the paper argues that the high turnover of shares in option-intensive companies may indicate that their shareholders are relatively unsophisticated--on the thought that the omission of option-related costs from GAAP earnings overstates the firm's true income and that uninformed investors trade heavily on this noise-ridden news.
Perhaps.
But the paper ignores other plausible explanations for the high turnover that may be unrelated to the sophistication of shareholders.
One such explanation is that option-intensive firms are concentrated in the high-tech sector, where the flow of news and, hence, trading opportunities are greater than elsewhere in the economy.
My second suggestion is that the authors be more careful about asserting that information technology has greatly expanded the presence of uninformed investors in the equity market.
Based on my reading of the available data, this occurrence seems far from clear, and I would like to spend a couple minutes indicating why.
Let's begin by looking at the aggregate data on household equity holdings from the Federal Reserve's flow of funds accounts.1 These data include direct holdings by households, along with the various forms of indirect equity holding that involve professional management (such as investing through mutual funds).
If uninformed individuals have played a growing and direct role in the equity market, as the paper argues, we might expect to see that direct holdings by households have become a larger share of the total equities outstanding.
However, as chart 1 (3 KB PDF) shows, we see just the opposite.
This result may reflect the fact, as indicated in chart 2 (3 KB PDF), that over the past decade, households have been reducing the portion of their equities that they hold directly and have increasingly invested through mutual funds and variable annuities (which are essentially mutual funds combined with life insurance).
That is, households have been handing over more and more of their equity portfolio to professional managers, who tend to be relatively well informed investors.
Household-level data on equity ownership paint a similar picture.
It is true, as shown by table 1 in the paper, that the number of U.S. households owning equity in some form has increased substantially.
However, this table also shows that relatively little of this increase reflects broader direct ownership of equity.
According to the Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances--which is the original data source for this table--only 19 percent of U.S. households owned individual stocks outside retirement accounts in 1998, barely above the 17 percent share in 1989.
Like the aggregate data, these figures suggest that new investors have largely been putting their money in managed accounts.
What do we actually know about the new investors who have chosen to buy individual stocks in recent years?
To my knowledge, the best source of such information is the "Equity Ownership in America" survey conducted in 1999 by the Investment Company Institute and the Securities Industry Association.
The following table uses these data to compare the households that first purchased individual stocks after 1995 with the households whose first purchase was between 1990 and 1995.2 I've split the sample at 1995 to assess whether the increased access to information and sharply lower trading costs since then have lured a cohort of clearly uninformed investors to the market.
Selected Characteristics of Households that First Purchased Individual Stocks in the 1990s (Median 1998 values, except for variables calculated as percentages) Household Characteristics First Purchase of Individual Stocks Outside Retirement Plans 1990-1995 After 1995 Age as of survey 42 41 College or postgraduate degree (percent) 63 52 Income $62,500 $62,100 Financial assets as of survey $120,000 $70,600 Number of individual stocks owned as of survey 3 2 Number of individual stock transactions in 1998 0 2 Willing to take more than average risk (percent) 44 55 Already had owned a stock mutual fund (percent) 33 41 Source: Unpublished tabulations provided by the Investment Company Institute, based on data from the "Equity Ownership in America" survey, jointly sponsored by the Investment Company Institute and the Securities Industry Association in 1999.
As the table shows, the two groups of investors appear to be similar in important respects.
There is almost no difference in median age (early 40s) or income (about $62,000) between the two groups, and investors in both groups tend to be well educated, although the proportion with a college or postgraduate degree is a little lower for the new-investor group.
With regard to their portfolios, the median investor in each group held only a few stocks and did little or no trading in 1998.3 The new-investor group tended to have a higher self-assessed tolerance for risk, which might suggest that these investors gravitated more to technology stocks, which have had such a wild ride in recent years.
However, it's also noteworthy that this group had more exposure to the equity market through prior ownership of stock mutual funds than did investors who first purchased individual equities between 1990 and 1995.
These observable characteristics are, of course, only crude proxies for what we really want to measure--the degree of market knowledge and sophistication.
Still, this survey provides little reason to believe that the new purchasers of individual stocks are especially likely to be duped by misleading information.
The survey results, combined with the data indicating a shift toward institutional holdings of equity, cast doubt on the authors' assertion that information technology has "brought unsophisticated investors in droves to the stock market."
I would feel more comfortable with an alternative story, which goes as follows.
The late 1990s were a period of optimism about the prospects for the U.S. economy, reflecting the pickup in productivity growth that was generated, in large part, by information technology.
The resultant optimism about the economy's growth prospects was accompanied by a complacent attitude toward risk, fed by the long bull market dating back to the early 1980s.
In this environment, many investors--not merely newcomers--purchased stock on the belief that business plans would become reality.
The problem was not, for the most part, that new investors came to dominate the market but that many investors' attitude toward and perception of risk changed markedly.
This explanation of recent events, which avoids the less-compelling aspects of the paper, appears to provide a stronger foundation for the authors' observations.
Given the panel topic of finance in the information age, I would now like to broaden the discussion by considering the actual or likely effects of technology on product attributes, pricing, and welfare in markets for other financial products.
Since I read the paper to be focused mainly on the retail market, I shall continue in that vein.
For a number of retail financial products, new technologies have surely led to a general increase in welfare.
New delivery technologies, such as the Internet, when combined with automated underwriting and credit scoring, have given borrowers the opportunity to select from a broader set of providers of credit cards, mortgages, and even some types of small business loans--one of the most informationally opaque financial products.
Competition has been enhanced as new technology makes it easier for non-banking institutions to offer these products and for out-of-market financial firms to compete with local financial institutions.
In addition, securitization--which is also dependent on advances in information technology--has broadened the pool of lenders by allowing loan originators to package risk and then shift the risk to the parties best able to bear it.
At the same time, automated underwriting and credit scoring are improving the ability of lenders to evaluate and price credit risk, which has allowed credit to be extended to a wider range of borrowers.
The rapid growth in the market for subprime mortgages is but one example of the broader access to credit.
In effect, advances in information technology are helping to ameliorate a key imperfection in loan markets--namely, the outright denial of credit to relatively risky borrowers in the face of limited information.
Recent events indicate that this product market is still evolving.
Automated underwriting and credit scoring are also substantially reducing the time and cost involved in making credit decisions.
These savings contribute to the overall welfare improvement brought about by information technology.
In the area of mortgage lending, for example, credit decisions today are routinely made in minutes rather than days and at much lower cost than a decade ago.
Freddie Mac reports that the cost of originating mortgage loans processed through their system has fallen hundreds of dollars, helping to overcome one of the main barriers to homeownership--a lack of available savings to meet closing costs and downpayment requirements.
Another benefit of automated underwriting is that credit decisions have become more transparent, to both lenders and potential borrowers.
Individuals can easily obtain their credit report and credit score, check whether any information in the report is incorrect, and learn how they can improve their credit standing.
In short, while the paper raises important concerns about equity markets, other areas of finance provide evidence that the information age has brought significant benefits in the form of increased transparency and competition, lower costs, more appropriate pricing, and broader access to credit.
Technology has also expanded the ways in which customers can conduct business with financial institutions, which has the potential to increase welfare.
For example, the need for "in-person visits" has diminished as financial service providers have established centralized call centers to facilitate telephone banking, developed web sites to allow Internet banking and software to permit PC banking, and promoted the use of direct deposits and pre-authorized debits.
According to recent statistics, nearly 40 percent of all U.S. banks now provide some form of web site through which they can communicate with customers, and almost 15 percent provide web sites that can be used to conduct banking transactions.
These numbers are growing rapidly.
Of the banks with more than $500 million in assets, nearly 50 percent now provide web sites that can be used to conduct transactions.
As the need for in-person visits declines, we might expect customers to broaden the geographic area within which they search for providers of financial services, leading to increased competition.
Clearly, mortgages and credit cards already fall into this category of financial product.
Nonetheless, the implications of these newer delivery channels for banking products other than mortgages and credit cards seem more potential than real for the vast majority of bank retail customers.
For example, despite the expanded options made available to customers as a result of technological advances, data collected in the Federal Reserve's 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances and 1998 Survey of Small Business Finances indicate that households and small businesses still rely very heavily on in-person visits to carry out their financial transactions.
Eighty-one percent of households surveyed in 1998 indicated that they used in-person visits as a means for conducting business with a financial institution, and 86 percent of small businesses indicated that during 1998 they relied upon such visits as their most common method for dealing with their primary financial institution.
Only 6 percent of households reported having used a computer to conduct business with a financial institution in 1998.
Electronic access to financial institutions, no doubt, will continue to grow, and the next Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer Finances will provide valuable data about the changes through 2001.
In the meantime, the facts I have highlighted and other data already available demonstrate that the use of electronic technologies for dealing with a financial institution deserves monitoring and continuing analysis and evaluation.
It is also worth noting that some technology-driven financial services have been commercial failures.
In the world of payments, stored value cards are clearly technically viable but have yet to be widely used.
The "cashless society" appears little closer today than when that phrase began to be used forty years ago.
One likely explanation is that network effects are important in determining which innovations succeed or fail.
In many retail payment experiments, too few consumers or merchants use a payment network or a new instrument for these technology-driven services to become economically viable.
In concluding, the paper has added a note of caution to the discussions of the potential welfare-improving elements of finance in the information age.
Though I have taken exception to some of the detailed analysis in the paper and noted that other financial products likely have been enhanced by the emergence of new technologies, it is clear that technology has not changed all elements of the delivery of financial services or cured all market imperfections.
Likewise, not all technology-derived financial products have achieved commercial success.
The authors are to be commended for reinforcing these common-sense lessons.
By doing so they give further impetus to both financial literacy and regulations that foster market experimentation and development while appropriately protecting those that need to be protected and responding to market imperfections when they appear.
Footnotes 1.
Technically, these data combine nonprofit organizations with the household sector; however, the nonprofits are a small part of this aggregate, so we can safely regard the data as pertaining to households.
Return to text 2.
This comparison is based on unpublished tabulations of the survey data that were kindly provided by the Investment Company Institute.
Return to text 3.

