They have done so again this year.
The safety net, along with our improved understanding of how to use monetary and fiscal policies, has played a critical role in this country in eliminating bank runs, in assuaging financial crises, and arguably in reducing the number and amplitude of economic contractions in the past sixty years.
Deposit insurance, the discount window, and access to Fedwire and daylight overdrafts provide depository institutions and financial market participants with safety, liquidity, and solvency unheard of in previous years.
These benefits, however, have come with a cost: distortions in the price signals that are used to allocate resources, induced excessive risk-taking, and, to limit the resultant moral hazard, greater government supervision and regulation.
Clearly, the latter carries with it attendant inefficiencies and limits on innovation.
It is to these issues that I wish to turn.
Since its beginnings, banking has been a business with two salient characteristics: risk-taking (that is, extending credit) and leverage (by which I mean, borrowing significant portions of the funds used to finance credit extensions).
These classic intermediation functions provide the bank with reduced risk through loan-portfolio diversification.
In addition, they provide savers and other asset holders with expanded asset choices and borrowers with a greater number of funding options.
In so doing, intermediation contributes significantly to a more efficient allocation of real resources and, hence, to higher levels of economic activity.
But there has always been an Achilles' heel in such intermediation.
Bad judgments, bad luck, or changes in regional or other macroeconomic conditions can cause bank borrowers to default.
Bank creditors--historically their depositors--either in response to adversity or, for that matter, any reason, might decide to withdraw their funds.
In either event, the bank could fail--because of illiquidity or insolvency or both.
These crises could, of course, happen to any business.
Any firm could have bad assets or inadequate funding and fail as a result.
What is different about leveraged financial intermediaries is first, that the claims on banks are such important assets to a wide spectrum of economic agents, and second, the possibility, however remote, of a chain reaction, a cascading sequence of defaults that could culminate in financial implosion.
Such events could have a substantial adverse impact on the real economy.
Historically, both bank owners and bank depositors have understood this problem.
And, acting in their own self-interest, each group has tried to limit its risks--loss of their equity or their deposits.
That is, banks were supervised by the market, with government oversight initially limited to chartering and trying to ensure at least minimum specie reserves to meet demand for repayment of banks' circulating note liabilities.
Brokers and other arbitrageurs soon emerged, and their evaluation of the quality of individual banks was instrumental in establishing market prices--discounts--on the notes of individual banks.
By collecting notes that were issued in excessive amounts and presenting them for payment, regional clearing systems also served as a limit on the banks with perhaps excessive risk appetites.
In short, market discipline in one form or another was the major governor of bank risk-taking from the early years of the Republic.
Advancing technology--telegraph, railroad, and transatlantic cable--disseminated information, the raw material for market discipline, ever more rapidly.
In this environment, banks competed for reputation, and hence deposits, by advertising their high capital ratios.
Indeed, high levels of equity capital had generally been necessary to induce the public to deposit its funds or to accept bank notes.
Equity also played an important role in protecting bank owners from the short-term vicissitudes of lending.
Equity capital ratios declined throughout the nineteenth century as increased real-time information capabilities lowered risk premiums embodied in equity contracts, but also because of bank risk-sharing through correspondent relationships, wider supervision, and state and, later, federal note collateral requirements.
Equity capital ratios, which were as high as 50 percent in the 1830s, were still a third in the 1860s and more than 15 percent at the time the Federal Reserve began operations in 1914.
But if market discipline was such an attractive governor for managing risk, why were the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries punctuated by those periodic banking collapses known to historians as panics?
"Panic" was, in fact, a good description, since participants felt it necessary, during those periodic disruptions, to rush to the bank window to obtain their share of what all understood was the limited stock of liquidity before being beaten in the race by others driven by the same incentive.
The reason for these panics, arguably, was the inflexibility of the banking system, more specifically limits on the maximum amount of currency outstanding associated with a specie reserve, whose limited quantity acted as a severe, and often sudden, constraint whenever conditions put a stress on liquidity.
The National Bank Act of 1863, an endeavor to assist in the debt financing of the Civil War, made matters worse by requiring that national bank notes be collateralized by federal government securities.
In effect, Congress put a limit on the ability of banks to honor currency demands above the amount that could be collateralized by these specific bank assets.
The inflexibility of currency to seasonal demands, especially those associated with the harvest, put severe strains on financial centers.
Writing in 1910 for the National Monetary Commission, whose report was instrumental in the creation of the Federal Reserve System, Edwin Kemmerer noted, "The evidence …points to a tendency for panics to occur during the seasons normally characterized by stringent money markets.
"1 With the demise of the Second Bank of the United States in 1836, the nation had no central bank that could provide flexibility to our banking system by liquefying perfectly safe assets as required.
The Federal Reserve Act of 1913 was specifically designed to address the need for both an "elastic currency" and a source of liquidity to both the banking system and to individual banks.
Of course, the mere existence of a central bank is not enough.
The monetary authorities must know what to do.
Many argue, for example, that the Federal Reserve did not provide sufficient liquidity in the early 1930s to avoid the conversion of a severe, but not unusual, decline into a massive economic contraction.
Policymakers at the time, employing the best information and theory available to them, did not provide the needed liquidity, business annals suggest, because they feared possible adverse adjustments under the gold standard, continued distortions from speculation and, especially, inflation.
More generally, they believed that excesses developed earlier had to be wrung out of the financial system as the base for future expansion.
Scholars, with the benefit of hindsight, have suggested that an easier stance of monetary policy in 1930-32 and an aggressive use of the discount window in 1933 could have made a significant difference.
To be sure, there were insolvent banks with poor assets.
But, at some stage, depositors, fearful of losing the race to others, rushed to their bank for the liquidity that even the solvent banks could not provide.
When that occurred, not only did many banks fail, but the surviving banks husbanded the sought-after liquidity and simply ceased to fulfill their reason for being, to take risk by making loans.
The collapsed banking system and the associated Great Depression clearly shaped a bank regulatory structure that only began to change in recent years and still retains most of the safety net that was constructed seventy years ago.
Congress responded to the Depression-traumatized banking system and devastated economy by creating a national deposit insurance system.
It was designed, of course, to provide depositors with an extra measure of protection from loss, initially quite modest.
By deterring liquidity panics, deposit insurance could also shield the aggregate real economy from some of the worst effects of instability in the banking system.
In combination with the discount window at a central bank that now clearly understands its responsibility to prevent major financial market disruption, deposit insurance has made an anachronism of the widespread currency drains that dominated banking literature in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
The result has been that the United States has not suffered a financial panic or systemic bank run in more than sixty years, despite a significant increase in bank failures in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
This record, I think, largely reflects the safety net, whose existence, as much as its use, has helped to sustain confidence.
I do not, of course, want to downplay the importance of other changing economic structures, macroeconomic policies, and plain good luck.
But neither should the benefits of the safety net be overlooked.
Mere reference to the availability of the discount window during both the savings and loan crisis and the aftermath of the 1987 stock market contraction arguably served to greatly limit real demands for liquidity at a time of potentially significant financial distress, although, in the events, the actual use of the window was modest.
Increased macroeconomic stability is a real benefit and should not be taken lightly.
But this benefit, as I noted, is not purchased without cost to the real economy.
The safety net lowers the risk premium on bank liabilities, encouraging banks to operate with higher-risk portfolios and lower capital--to less than 4 percent equity at our largest banks in 1974, for example.
That is, the safety net weakens the connection between portfolio and leverage risks, on the one hand, and depositor and other liability costs on the other.
Insured depositors are simply indifferent, and other creditors too often less sensitive than they would be at other entities, to the risk taken by the bank because of both the reality and the perception of their own protection by the government.
Part of this sense of assurance comes from the enhanced prudential supervision of banking organizations required both to protect the government's interest as insurer and to replace the market discipline that bank management and depositors themselves used to provide but feel they no longer need, given the perceived guarantees of the safety net and supervision.
A kind of vicious circle of government replacement of market oversight has been clearly set in motion.
The result is a distortion in real resource allocation in our economy.
The safety net enables banks to accumulate larger, riskier asset portfolios than would be possible in an intermediation process driven solely by market forces.
In the absence of the safety net, these higher lending risks would have to be reflected in some combination of higher deposit costs, more liquid asset holdings, or a larger capital base.
Or, conversely, these adjustments would have constrained the risk-taking by banks.
But, with the safety net, lower interest rates and higher credit availability are accorded riskier borrowers, benefiting speculative and riskier ventures at the expense of sounder ones.
Indeed, the safety net, other things being equal, as I noted earlier, facilitates the ability of riskier borrowers to translate their potential credit demands to effective control over resources, crowding out projects with higher prospective risk-adjusted returns.
To be sure, the regulatory authorities, in an effort both to protect the taxpayer's interest and to avoid financial market disruptions, seek to discourage excessive risk taking.
But rules, regulations, and supervision cannot substitute for market signals; they can attempt only to filter out--and not always successfully--the worst cases of uneconomic risk taking.
And, enhanced efforts to do so intensify the perception of private parties that their responsibility for self-protecting diligence is reduced.
Moreover, they add to misallocation of resources because of the necessary inflexibility and bluntness that accompanies governmental action.
What options then are available to society to reduce the downsides of the safety net?
To be sure, the safety net as we know it is a product of the Great Depression, and that economic disaster was the result of a combination of events unlikely to recur.
In addition, the moral-hazard costs of the safety net are significant.
Nonetheless, the safety net, by providing ongoing access to real resources, has become capitalized into a broad spectrum of asset values.
It is now an embedded part of our social and economic framework, for good or ill. Viewed in its most favorable light, the safety net does guard against those once-in-a-century or so breakdowns in market forces, however induced.
The long absence of a fire, or of an economic and financial conflagration, does not suggest that we should cancel the fire insurance policy or the safety net.
But, I do think that as a society we ought to explore what we can do at the margin to retain the economic benefits and lower the economic costs of the safety net.
We ought to be careful that we do not, through safety net expansion, increase the marginal costs more than the marginal benefits.
A look back to the pre-safety-net era might be helpful as part of that exploration.
I have in the past suggested that to lessen the moral hazard of the safety net and to improve supervision and regulation, public policy should attempt to simulate, in so far as possible, what markets alone might do, or at least to create market-type incentives.
To do so would, of course, move us closer to the period of pre-safety-net incentives while avoiding, one hopes, the distortions of that regime.
For example, solvent banks must remain assured that they will be able to liquefy their sound assets at times of liquidity distress, but ideally, we would otherwise like banks to be managed as if there were no safety net.
That is, if we retain the safety net, we ought to price and otherwise manage it so that the banking system is as close as possible to the one the market alone would provide.
Clearly one of those steps would be better pricing of safety-net access.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has proposed some useful initiatives to move in that direction.
The usual suggested premiums for deposit insurance are, of course, far from those that would fully eliminate the subsidy that insurance provides to depository institutions and their borrowers and depositors, especially at times of financial crisis.
Indeed, to eliminate the subsidy in deposit insurance, the FDIC insurance premium would have to be set high enough to cover the extreme-loss tail of the distribution of possible outcomes and thus the perceived costs of systemic risk.
Since so high a rate appears politically infeasible, the subsidy in deposit insurance cannot be fully eliminated.
Moreover, no private insurer will be able to match the actual FDIC premium and cover its risk from the extreme-loss tail.
Obviously, if premiums were fully priced, the level of insured deposits would be significantly lower.
But even if we have chosen not to go that far, more risk-sensitive pricing is nonetheless helpful, and prudential regulation has already begun to move in the right direction to reduce the safety net subsidy.
It has increasingly become risk-focused on processes, policies, and procedures for managing risk--with transaction-testing to ensure these are being used--rather than on-balance-sheet analysis.
Supervision and examination policies are on a track to become even more risk-focused with the evolving new Basel Capital Accord.
As you know, the first pillar of the proposed new accord contemplates that the larger, more sophisticated banks will use internal risk classifications of their credit portfolios, validated by the supervisor, for pricing, loan-loss reserving, and most important, for determining their minimum capital requirements.
This approach moves us further down the road of making capital requirements sensitive to an individual bank's risk profile and exposure.
And, it seeks to do so in a way that ensures that there are not, as it were, two sets of books, by requiring that the parameters used to determine regulatory capital are the same parameters that management also uses to run the bank.
Far more important for my topic today is that the proposed capital requirement better simulates what an informed market and management would require for bank capital.
As a result, minimum regulatory equity capital might fall for some banks but rise for others on the basis of their portfolio risk profiles.
What needs underlining is the new factor in determining credit risk policies: Taking on more risk will increase capital costs.
In addition, regulatory capital minimums, even when more risk sensitive, remain minimums, and the proposed accord assumes that banks will hold a level of economic capital above those minimums.
Economic capital, determined by management, will reflect managers' desired securities ratings and cost of funds, as well as their banks' operational and other noncredit risks.
Supervisory oversight, however, will review actual or economic capital in light of examiners' evaluation of banks' internal models and their policies and procedures.
Such reviews, the so-called second pillar of the proposed accord, are also risk-based and seek to simulate what bank managers and the market would do if there were no safety net.
If they want to emphasize their capital strength or if their systems are falling behind, banks will choose, or be induced, to hold more capital.
There is a third pillar to this approach, one that I believe is critical: market discipline.
The real pre-safety-net discipline was from the market, and we need to adopt policies that promote private counterparty supervision as the first line of defense for a safe and sound banking system.
Uninsured counterparties must price higher or simply not deal with banking organizations that take on excessive risk.
For private market discipline to be effective, there are, in my judgment, two prerequisites.
The first is disclosure.
Counterparties need information on which to make informed decisions about the riskiness of bank claims.
Banks in this country already disclose a considerable amount of information, and there is clear evidence that markets already use that information to impose some risk premium on uninsured bank claims.
But the quantity and quality of such disclosure is uneven, and all entities could, should, and may soon be required to disclose more and better data.
We are doing our part to ensure that banking organizations maintain appropriate information and provide more information to those that are asked to assume more prudential monitoring.
Later this morning, Governor Meyer will describe our evolving disclosure policies with more specificity.
Expanded disclosure will be critical to enhanced market discipline, but the additional information will be irrelevant unless counterparties believe that they are, in fact, at risk.
That is why the second prerequisite to effective market discipline is the belief by uninsured creditors that at least they may be at risk of loss.
Uninsured counterparties have little reason to engage in risk analysis, let alone act on such analysis, if they believe that they will always be made whole under a de facto too-big-to-fail policy by government's recourse to the procedure for exception to the least-cost resolution requirements of FDICIA (the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act).
Let me remind you that the ten largest U.S. banking organizations fund only about one-fourth of their worldwide banking assets with insured deposits.
Let me also remind you that the least-cost resolution exception does not require that all uninsured creditors be made whole, but rather only that they be made no worse off than they would have been if the bank were liquidated.
The potential for greater market discipline at large institutions is substantial.
As a central banker, I can conceive of rare situations where events may require that the FDIC and other governmental resources be used to temporarily sustain a failing institution pending its managed liquidation.
But indefinitely propping up insolvent intermediaries is the road to stagnation and substantial resource misallocation, as recent history attests.
Unlike brick-and-mortar enterprises, financial intermediaries can expand and contract very rapidly.
As weak intermediaries contract, the markets can, and do, quickly replace the profitable services of the displaced intermediary.
Indeed, if the government protects all creditors, or is generally believed to protect all creditors, the other efforts to reduce the costs of the safety net will be of little benefit.
The implications are similar if the public does not, or cannot, distinguish a bank from its affiliates.
As financial consolidation continues, and as banking organizations take advantage of a wider range of activities, the perception that all creditors of large banks, let alone of their affiliates, are protected by the safety net is a recipe for a vast misallocation of resources and increasingly intrusive supervision.
In conclusion, let me state the obvious.
The purpose of banking, finance, and intermediation is to facilitate the production and trade of goods and services.
Standards of living rise when the cash flows from obsolescent, low-productivity capital are employed to finance newer, cutting-edge, technologies--the process that Joseph Schumpeter many decades ago labeled "creative destruction."
Financial markets best serve this process if market forces are given free rein.
Yet society's willingness for this process to go wholly unchecked is limited, especially for financial institutions.
The perceived value of stability has countered the advantages of raw competitive creative destruction.
While valuing the benefits of stability that the safety net confers, we nonetheless need to recognize that the benefits are not without cost.
In this context, reform of the safety net must remain on the agenda.

It is my pleasure to participate in this distinguished conference.
I look forward to a fruitful and stimulating discussion with both my fellow panel members and the audience.
The federal safety net for depository institutions--by which I mean deposit insurance, access to the Federal Reserve's discount window and payment system guarantees, and the implicit certification of soundness that counterparties believe accompanies federal supervision and regulation--has been a potent force for ensuring the stability of the U.S. banking and financial system.
We should preserve these benefits.
However, as we learned to our chagrin in the late 1980s and early 1990s, this system can impose serious costs because of the unintended consequences of "moral hazard"--the incentive to take excessive risk and the consequent reduction of market discipline.
Moreover, these costs can be especially large if supervisors tend to delay, or forebear, in resolving troubled and insolvent institutions.
In my remarks this morning, I will first review the lessons that I believe we learned from the last banking crisis regarding how best to control the unintended consequences of the safety net; I will then look forward to what I believe still needs to be done.
In the course of my presentation, I will expand on a number of the themes in Chairman Greenspan's remarks and suggest priorities for our current and future efforts.
Lessons from the Past The banking crisis of the late 1980s and early 1990s led to a number of key reforms that were designed, individually and in total, to limit the unintended consequences of the federal safety net.
In 1988, bank supervisors from the United States and the major industrial nations adopted what has come to be known as the Basel Capital Accord.
The accord, which had been under development for several years, helped to focus supervisors and the industry on the importance of adequate capital for bank safety and soundness.
It was a de facto increase in capital standards for a number of depository institutions, particularly large firms with significant risks from off-balance-sheet activities.
In the parlance of finance theory, higher capital standards reduced the value of the put option provided by federal deposit insurance and lowered the exposure of the safety net as a whole.
The accord also emphasized the importance of making supervisory standards sensitive to an individual institution's risk.
The international nature of the accord meant that it explicitly recognized the increasing globalization of the activities of many depository institutions, their parent organizations, and financial markets more generally.
Lastly, the accord helped align the incentives of supervisors and market participants.
Almost immediately, market participants began to evaluate banking organizations on the basis of the fully phased-in system, even though full implementation was officially delayed until the end of 1992.
December 1991 saw enactment of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act, or FDICIA.
This massive act contained a number of critical reforms, some of which extended principles embedded in the Basel accord, and some of which struck out in new directions.
FDICIA required that bank supervisors take prompt corrective action against troubled depositories.
The basic idea was that by requiring supervisors to act promptly, the act would deter supervisors from engaging in regulatory forebearance, and depositories would be given strong incentives to correct problems quickly.
As a result, moral hazard would be reduced, and taxpayer losses would be limited.
Reinforcing the importance of adequate capital, the prompt corrective action provisions required that increasingly strong actions be taken against a depository institution as its capital ratios fell.
The banking agencies were required to implement the policy of prompt corrective action no later than mid-December 1992, approximately the same date as for full implementation of the Basel accord.
The incentives provided by a policy of prompt corrective action for deterring moral hazard and limiting taxpayer losses were reinforced by the least-cost-resolution requirements of FDICIA.
Under least-cost resolution, the FDIC was directed to resolve a failed institution, and protect insured depositors, in a way that was "the least costly to the deposit insurance fund of all possible methods for meeting the Corporation's obligation."
Although the act provided for certain exceptions to this charge, to which I shall return in a moment, the general thrust of least-cost resolution was to encourage market discipline by putting uninsured depositors and other liability holders at greater risk.
Indeed, of the eighty-two banks that failed between 1993 and 2000, uninsured depositors have suffered losses in almost three-quarters of the resolutions, and in the balance of the cases the FDIC received higher bids to acquire the failing institutions with the uninsured creditors than without.
Not surprisingly, research suggests that market discipline has increased in the post-FDICIA period.
FDICIA reinforced the importance of risk-focused supervision and regulation by requiring the FDIC to implement a system of risk-based deposit insurance premiums.
This system, first implemented in 1993, has had some success.
It has also been hampered, in part, by the technical difficulty of estimating an appropriate premium.
But it has also been hampered by the limitations imposed on risk-based pricing by the requirement that the reserve ratios of the FDIC's insurance funds for banks and savings associations be capped at 1.25 percent.
The so-called "systemic risk exception" in FDICIA has been one of the act's most controversial provisions.
Under this provision, resolution of a failed depository need not be least-cost, and uninsured creditors may be protected if it is determined that a least-cost resolution would "have serious adverse effects on economic conditions or financial stability" and that a resolution that is not least-cost would "avoid or mitigate such adverse effects."
Some critics have argued that the systemic risk exception maintains a policy of too-big-to-fail, thus undermining FDICIA's other efforts to reduce moral hazard, encourage market discipline, and limit taxpayer liability, not to mention putting small banks that are "too-small-to-save" at a disadvantage.
In my judgment, these criticisms are off the mark.
The systemic risk exception recognizes the reality that in a major crisis the benefits of preserving the stability of the banking and financial system may very well outweigh the costs, including future moral hazard, of extending some additional protection to uninsured creditors in a crisis.
Moreover, in my view, inadequate attention has been paid to several mitigating factors.
Restrictions on the use of the exception, and the flexibility with which it may be employed, combine to substantially restrict its potentially adverse effects.
For example, use of the exception is made difficult by FDICIA's requirement that in order for the exception to be triggered, two-thirds of both the Federal Reserve and the FDIC boards must determine that the circumstances necessary to invoke the exception are met, and both must recommend use of the exception to the Secretary of the Treasury.
The Secretary must, in turn, consult with the President before determining that the exception is warranted.
Reinforcing this hurdle, costs over and above what would have been incurred in a least-cost resolution must be recovered from healthy insured depositories through higher deposit insurance premiums rather than from taxpayers as a whole.
In addition, and this has not been emphasized sufficiently in my view, nothing in the systemic risk exception requires that uninsured creditors be made whole.
Equity holders' stakes will almost surely be wiped out if the systemic risk exception is invoked.
Uninsured creditors' claims also can be discounted to reduce FDIC costs, to limit future moral hazard, and to encourage market discipline--provided that no creditor receives less than would have been the case in a liquidation of the bank.
In the post-FDICIA world, the Congress and bank supervisors have continued to emphasize limiting the federal safety net and protecting taxpayers.
For example, since the mid-1990s the Federal Reserve has devoted substantial resources to developing and implementing a supervisory program for the largest and most complex banking organizations, or LCBOs.
It is highly risk focused and recognizes the realities of modern finance and risk management.
Other banking agencies have developed similar programs.
At the legislative level, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act clearly sought to deter the expansion of safety-net benefits beyond insured depositories.
A Road Map for the Future So, here we stand in the spring of 2001 having implemented a large number of reforms designed to limit the moral hazard inherent in the federal safety net, to enhance market discipline, and to control taxpayer costs.
Why do we need to do more?
At a fundamental level the answer to this question is, in my judgment, quite uncertain.
The hard reality is that all of the reforms I have just discussed have not been tested in the crucible of a banking or financial crisis.
Do not misunderstand me, I am not looking for a crisis!
But I think that it must be recognized at the start that we may have already gone a long way toward achieving the appropriate balance between the need to preserve the stability of the banking and financial system and the need to limit the unintended consequences of doing just that.
Still, there seems to be a widespread feeling, which I share, that additional, or at least improved, efforts toward limiting moral hazard, enhancing market discipline, and lowering taxpayer liabilities should and can be made.
Our world is a rapidly changing place, with technological change, financial engineering, globalization, and deregulation combining to alter the realities we all face.
As a result, all of us must be willing to adapt old policies and adopt new ones if the circumstances require.
In my final minutes, I will suggest how I believe we should set our priorities.
In my mind, the safety and soundness of individual banks, the stability of the overall banking system, limitations on moral hazard, enhanced market discipline, and reduced taxpayer liability all begin with strong equity capital positions at individual depository institutions.
Strong equity capital--in the language of Basel, tier 1 capital--provides a cushion against unexpected losses that can be used without triggering the bank's default.
More generally, strong equity capital lowers the probability that a bank will fail.
For example, when a bank is in trouble, it can build its capital through retained earnings because equity holders do not have to be paid dividends.
In contrast, debt requires interest expenditures that may make it more difficult to maintain the viability of the firm.
Strong equity capital also provides owners with a substantial stake in the future value of the firm and thus helps to control the safety net's moral hazard incentives to take excessive risk.
Moreover, equity provides a first-loss buffer that provides some protection for holders of subordinated debt and other uninsured liabilities.
Such protection is important because investors in subordinated debt and other uninsured liabilities do not benefit from the upside gains from the bank's risk taking in the same way as equity holders.
For all of these reasons, we should insist on strong equity positions and not be indifferent to the choice between equity, various hybrid capital instruments such as trust preferred stock, and subordinated debt or any other uninsured liability.
When a bank does fail, every dollar of losses absorbed by either tier 1 or tier 2 capital is one less dollar absorbed by the FDIC or the taxpayer.
Equally important, from the point of view of day-by-day supervision, capital standards provide the foundation upon which nearly all supervisory and regulatory policies depend.
Unfortunately, despite its central role, there is a problem with bank regulatory capital as we know it.
As I suggested earlier, the 1988 Basel accord was a major step forward at that time.
But, as my fellow Board members and I and many others have been arguing for a number of years, the existing risk-based capital standards are increasingly divorced from the realities of modern risk management for a small but growing number of banking institutions.
In addition, the increasing estrangement between regulatory capital standards and economic reality has encouraged many firms to engage in regulatory capital arbitrage, by which I mean rearranging their portfolios in ways that allow them both to meet the capital standards and to take on more risk.
As a result, the Basel accord capital ratios are an increasingly less reliable guide to the true capital strength of the firm and thus are less and less useful to both the public and private sectors.
Importantly, the banking institutions for which the existing capital standards are the most distorted are in many cases the very institutions whose disorderly failure would be most likely to impose systemic risks.
In light of these developments, in my judgment, it is of the highest priority that, for the most financially sophisticated and complex banks, we make the capital standards more reflective of the risks that they are, in fact, taking.
As I hope everyone in this room is fully aware, such efforts are well under way.
In January of this year, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision released its second consultative paper for the New Basel Capital Accord and asked for public comment by the end of May.
Let me emphasize that we really do need and desire public comment on our proposals.
No one in the supervisory community believes that we have solved, or even at this point know how to solve, all of the problems with the 1988 accord.
Success will come only if both supervisors and private market participants bring their best ideas to the table.
Moreover, we fully expect that the new accord, like the old accord, will be a living document that is revised as technology and other aspects of the economic environment evolve.
Let me also acknowledge that the new capital proposals are complex, and the documentation we released in January is, to say the least, daunting.
But this complexity reflects the reality that, at least for a small number of generally large and internationally active banking organizations that are engaged in a wide range of traditional and not-so-traditional banking activities, modern risk taking and risk management are complex.
Moreover, risk management is increasingly susceptible to quantification and statistical analysis.
The new accord attempts to respond to these facts for those relatively few institutions to which this reality applies while making only minor changes to the existing capital standards for the vast majority of banking organizations.
Indeed, an important reason for the new accord's complexity is that it proposes three alternative capital standards to allow for a wide range of needs and risk management practices at individual institutions and for the evolution of both over time.
A second priority for bank supervisors is to continue to develop procedures that make sure no bank is too big to fail in these senses: that stockholders can lose all, that existing management can be replaced, that uninsured creditors can suffer losses, and that the institution can be wound down and possibly sold, in whole or in part, in an orderly way.
As I indicated a few minutes ago, nothing in FDICIA's systemic risk exception prevents implementation of such a policy.
At the Federal Reserve, developing such procedures is already a high priority.
For example, in 1999 I chaired a committee of Board members and Reserve Bank presidents that assessed the issues and took action in a number of areas, and contingency planning is ongoing.
More recently, a study by the Group of Ten nations, directed by my colleague on the Board, Vice Chairman Roger W. Ferguson, Jr., highlighted the importance of this issue in an international context.
Although considerable evidence shows that market discipline is an important force in controlling bank risk taking, I believe that reinforcing the effectiveness of market discipline should also be a high priority.
After all, market discipline is the first line of defense for all bank supervisors.
Recent efforts by U.S. bank supervisors to augment market discipline have focused on increased disclosure in order to improve the transparency of depositories.
For example, disclosures are a core element of the proposal for a new Basel accord.
However, in my judgment the current proposal needs some refining.
In general, I would streamline required disclosures in certain areas, such as the internal-ratings-based approach for credit risk.
Furthermore, the proposal should strike a better balance of requirements versus recommendations.
For example, it is critical that banks be required to disclose their capital ratios.
Last year the Board, in consultation with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Securities and Exchange Commission, created a private-sector advisory group of bank and securities firm executives, under the chairmanship of Walter Shipley, to study and advise the Board on public disclosure issues.
Their report, issued early this year, was supported by all of the agencies involved.
Indeed, in late March the agencies issued formal guidance encouraging the largest banking organizations and securities firms to use the report's recommendations.
Very briefly, the Shipley report called for enhanced voluntary efforts at large financial institutions to disclose credit management, credit risk, and trading positions in ways best designed to fit the profiles of their firms and to meet the risk analysis needs of other market participants.
The report emphasized the need to balance the importance of quantitative information on a firm's risk exposure with qualitative information describing its risk-management process.
In addition to broad principles, the report advanced some specific practices designed to enhance current disclosures.
These include quarterly disclosure of some market-risk information now disclosed annually, and enhanced quarterly disclosures about credit concentrations and credit quality.
Although it is still too early to say for sure, I am optimistic that the recommendations in this report will lead to improved disclosure practices at our largest and most complex financial institutions, and perhaps others.
I would also note that the Federal Reserve staff is developing recommendations for how reviews of disclosure practices could be included in the supervisory process.
On a slightly different front, bank supervisors have substantially stepped-up their efforts to use market information in supervisory surveillance of the LCBOs.
For example, last summer, Fed staff began providing regular reports to supervisory personnel on the subordinated debt spreads and expected default frequencies derived from stock prices for selected LCBOs.
These reports also provide information designed to help supervisors interpret whether changes in an institution's debt spread or expected default frequency are significant.
Early feedback from line supervisors has been quite positive.
Indeed, the Board has instructed supervisory and research staff to devote substantial efforts to improving our ability to use market information in our surveillance activities.
The importance of using market information as an aid to supervisory surveillance was a major recommendation of a report to the Congress, "The Feasibility and Desirability of Mandatory Subordinated Debt," submitted by the Board and the Treasury Department late last year.
In that report, the Board, the OCC, and the Office of Thrift Supervision promised to continue and to enhance their "use of data from the subordinated debt, equity and other markets to evaluate the current and expected future condition of large depository organizations."
In addition, the agencies pledged to continue monitoring both subordinated debt yield spreads and issuance patterns at individual institutions.
Neither the Board nor the Treasury recommended adopting a mandatory subordinated debt policy at that time, although the door was left open for possible future action.
I know this is a disappointment to some, including at least one member of the panel here today.
Indeed, I have also expressed an inclination to move in this direction.
In the end, however, the Board and the Treasury judged that the evidence in favor of a mandatory subordinated debt policy was simply not strong enough to justify its adoption.
We came to this conclusion for three broad reasons.
First, because the current market for subordinated debt already provides measurable market discipline, the marginal benefits of a mandatory policy are very uncertain.
Second, all of the complementary policies that I discussed in the first part of my presentation have not yet been adequately tested.
Lastly, other policies are under consideration, such as augmented disclosures and a new Basel accord that would make minimum equity capital positions more risk sensitive.
My final set of priorities for limiting the safety net is deposit insurance reform.
I suspect my fellow panelist, Arthur Murton, will address this issue.
Moreover, the Board of Governors will no doubt be asked its views on deposit insurance reform and my silence on this issue also reflects the priority I attach to discussing the subject first with my fellow Board members.
I do want to express my appreciation of the thoughtful job the FDIC did first in preparing a paper on the key issues and then in setting out a set of general directions for reform.
They have effectively highlighted the key issues that need to be discussed.
These include whether or not to merge the Bank Insurance Fund and the Savings Association Insurance Fund, how to implement a more effective risk-pricing for deposit insurance, how to reduce or eliminate the current pro-cyclicality in insurance premia, and whether we should adjust the limit for deposit insurance coverage and, if so, how.
I look forward to a thoughtful discussion of these issues over coming months.
Conclusion In conclusion, I reiterate my judgment that the safety net provides highly desirable benefits to the American economy and people.
The question thus becomes how best to preserve those benefits while minimizing the safety net's well-recognized unintended consequences.
Although a number of critical reforms have already been implemented that restrain the unintended consequences of the safety net, I believe that we can and should make additional progress.
However, we must set priorities.

