As Certified Public Accountants (CPAs) serving the banking industry you contribute to our financial system as bank managers, financial executives, analysts, internal and external auditors, and advisers.
Your role in strengthening the internal control and transparency of banking organizations is a major one that we, as banking supervisors, are increasingly recognizing in our risk-focused examination policies, capital adequacy approaches, and disclosure initiatives.
The Impact of Terrorist Attacks Recently you, as CPAs with key roles in our financial system, have seen at first hand financial institutions and other companies--and indeed our country--work to overcome the challenges caused by the attacks of September 11.
Besides causing unimaginable personal loss and grief, the attacks rippled across our country, disrupting sales, production, and air travel and damping the confidence of consumers and businesses.
And the attacks severely, if temporarily, disrupted financial market operations and activity.
As testimony to the resilience of the American spirit, the immediate impact of the attacks has proved transient.
Our society and, in particular, our financial system are rebounding from the initial influences of the attacks.
In the financial sector, market participants showed great creativity, flexibility, and resolve in addressing the difficulties that arose on September 11.
To help the process, the Federal Reserve moved quickly to ensure financial market liquidity through record lending at the discount window and an infusion of funds through open market operations.
We encouraged financial institutions to provide their customers reasonable relief, such as waiving late payment fees, extending loan terms, restructuring debt obligations and easing credit terms in situations arising from the September 11 attacks.
Also, the Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies jointly issued a statement indicating our willingness to work with banks when increased extension of credit to customers may have caused a temporary decline in capital ratios.
As companies directly affected by the attacks struggled to resume their business, the accounting profession assumed an important role.
This was recognized in part by the release by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) on September 14 that relaxed the auditor independence rules to permit auditors to help their clients with internal reconciliations and certain accounting-records-related recovery efforts.
With the SEC's action, many accountants and auditors quickly assisted clients in reconstructing records and information.
As a result, many private firms and financial institutions were able to move to off-site locations and quickly restart operations.
We applaud your efforts and those of the businesses you serve.
The longer-term prospects for the U.S. economy remain sound, just as they were before September 11.
Our flexible markets, entrepreneurial spirit, well-educated work force, and major advances in information technology provide a sound foundation for the long-term growth of productivity, employment, and standards of living.
In the medium term, consumer and business behaviors will significantly affect the way our economy progresses.
Policymakers have reacted vigorously to changing macroeconomic conditions.
As you know, the Federal Open Market Committee has reduced its target for the federal funds rate by 150 basis points since September 11.
Banking Supervision and Accounting and Disclosure The Federal Reserve has long supported sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure by banking and financial organizations with the objective of improving market discipline and fostering stable financial markets.
Effective market discipline can complement bank supervision and regulation.
With sufficient accurate and relevant information, market participants can better evaluate counterparty risks and adjust the availability and pricing of funds to promote better allocation of financial resources.
The concept of market discipline is assuming greater importance among international banking supervisors as well.
The most recent proposal to amend and augment the Basel Capital Accord, which was published in January and called Basel II, seeks to strengthen the market's ability to aid bank supervisors in regulating capital adequacy.
It consists of three pillars, or tools: risk-based capital (pillar I), risk-based supervision (pillar II), and disclosure of risks and capital adequacy to enhance market discipline (pillar III).
This approach to capital regulation, with its market-discipline component, signals that sound accounting and disclosure will continue to be important parts of our supervisory approach for many years to come.
I understand that these efforts to enhance our capital rules will be addressed later today in a separate session, so I will not discuss them in depth.
However, I would like to point out that our goal in the Basel process is to develop a risk-sensitive framework that provides appropriate incentives to banking organizations to maintain strong capital positions and sound risk-management systems.
The history of the 1990s, which included episodes of global financial instability spreading from small countries through international capital markets and banks, underscores the need to maintain adequate capital in the internationally active banks.
For the sake of maintaining financial global stability, I hope that everyone values that goal.
On an international level, Basel II would also improve disclosure by many banks in foreign countries as well as in the United States.
The proposal recommends specific disclosures to convey better an institution's capital adequacy and risk profile.
The incentives in Basel II should greatly diminish the opacity that cloaks many international financial institutions and help bring about a convergence in international norms on banking disclosure.
I believe that counterparties will expect, indeed force, greater disclosure.
Recent history certainly teaches us that understanding a counterparty's balance sheet and risk appetite is necessary for accurately pricing any transaction or even for deciding whether to engage in a transaction.
Increased Supervisory Emphasis on Controls and Risk Management The Federal Reserve also seeks to strengthen audit and control standards for banks.
This goal is in large part due to our recognition several years ago that examining banks' business processes can provide a clearer assessment of their safety and soundness than focusing exclusively on transactions--that is, reviewing the means rather than the results.
Examining such processes became more necessary after we recognized years ago that the widening use of derivatives enabled an institution to substantially change its risk profile within hours--possibly shortly after the conclusion of an examination.
In addition, interim reporting is becoming more important in our monitoring of individual banks and the sector as a whole.
The quality of management information and financial reporting is dramatically affected by internal control systems, including internal and external audit programs.
Financial reporting and good internal controls are rising in importance with banking regulators because they directly affect our ability to promptly identify institutions in distress and work toward a satisfactory resolution.
My view is that the financial sector benefits when bankers, regulators, and auditors all focus on the quality of internal control systems.
Banks benefit directly from having more efficient and effective operations and indirectly from improved audit efficiency and reduced regulatory burden.
Auditors benefit from learning more about their client's business and better understanding the supervisor's perspective.
As banking supervisors, we benefit from tapping the auditor's expertise in assessing systems of internal control.
Auditor expertise is not sufficient, however.
Auditor independence is also critical to the relationship between supervisors and the profession.
Without it, the process breaks down; suspicions rise over auditor motives and the supervisor's ability to rely on auditor findings and recommendations is diminished.
The revisions of Basel II also address internal controls through a proposed capital charge for operational risk.
Developments such as the widespread adoption of technology, large-scale mergers, e-commerce, and the increased prevalence of outsourcing, can increase operational risk.
While the regulatory reforms are being developed--and in the interim before a formal revision to the Basel Accord--supervisors will continue evaluating management's ability to control operational risk.
This aspect of the effort to amend the Accord has been criticized by some in the industry either as unnecessary or as creating a formulaic approach that is only a crude approximation of a proper capital charge.
I suggest the events of September 11 indicate that operational risk is an issue that cannot be ignored.
I invite both internal and external auditors to monitor Basel II and offer their counsel on how best to reflect operational risk in capital.
Both managers and supervisors focused on the operational aspects of banking in the years leading up to year 2000, a date that was uneventful in large part because of the preparations that were made.
Now we know that the possible loss of physical facilities and key personnel, which were generally not considered as part of Y2K planning, must be factored into financial firms' disaster-recovery scenarios.
Similarly, providing reliable backup to key infrastructure--electricity, telephone, water--is likely to play a larger role in financial institutions' planning.
As we go forward, the operational preparedness of regulated institutions will figure more prominently in our supervisory program.
The Role of the External Auditor in the Banking Sector The Federal Reserve and other supervisory agencies have long recognized the key role that the accounting and auditing profession plays in assessing internal controls.
Guidance issued by the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies reflects the important role that both internal and external auditing play in enhancing internal systems and monitoring risk.
As required by statute, banking organizations with assets of more than $500 million must have annual independent audits.
The banking agencies encourage all small institutions to follow suit.
In a similar vein, the Basel Committee has produced extensive guidance on the roles of both the external audit and internal audit and the ways these can be factored into the supervisory process.
As I said, market discipline is becoming a key element of supervisory thinking, and market discipline depends on prompt, accurate financial information.
External auditors help significantly in ensuring that financial statements are reliable and useful to the marketplace.
Periodic financial statements of banking organizations are also used by the Federal Reserve in our risk-focused supervision programs.
These reports contribute to pre-examination planning, facilitate off-site monitoring programs, and ultimately help in determining the institution's financial condition.
A strong external audit program assists us in moving away from detailed, burdensome, and what some consider invasive examinations.
Supervised institutions might well decide to use the expertise of the external auditor for more than routine financial reports.
External auditors could also review the quality of internal controls and systems and assess the internal audit function's scope and adequacy.
We are all well aware that a strong system of internal control is the foundation for the safe and sound operation of the financial organization.
Furthermore, a financial institution's board of directors is responsible for setting the control environment, and senior managers are responsible for laying down the internal control process.
Recognizing that responsibility, I would not be surprised if boards of directors and senior managers are asking their external auditors to review the internal audit function and recommend improvements in light of the changed business environment post-September 11.
External auditors should be prepared to answer such questions from directors as the following: Is the internal audit function appropriate for the size of our institution and the nature and scope of our business, and are we receiving unbiased assessments?
Is our internal audit function competent given the current environment?
Are the resources available to our internal audit function adequate given the nature, complexity, and risk of our institutions' activities?
Are weaknesses being fully identified and reported promptly to us?
External auditors can also help federal regulators by encouraging financial institutions to frequently reassess and refine their risk-management practices.
A risk-management system should continually monitor financial risks in a changing business climate, such as the outlook for credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk, and operational risk.
Of course, the potential benefits of external audits can be realized only when audits are performed according to high professional standards.
This is not a time when the accounting profession can be complacent.
Each firm should review its own internal practices to ensure that audits are of the best quality, consistent with sound practices and high standards of ethics and independence.
The peer-review process should be viewed as an opportunity to improve quality rather than a somewhat routine compliance obligation.
I certainly encourage the auditing profession to police itself and to strive continually to improve audit quality.
By doing so you avoid suspicions regarding the competence and judgment of independent auditors.
Also keep foremost in mind that your ultimate client is not management but the shareholder.
You need not only to watch for misleading financial statements but also for companies that apply the technical rules underlying accounting standards in ways that cover losses or otherwise obscure the condition and performance of an institution.
Attention to these matters will help ensure that audits deliver their promised benefits, that transparency is enhanced, and that market participants and supervisors are better able to regulate the risk-taking of financial institutions in ways that promote financial stability.
Conclusion In the face of a rapidly evolving external environment, I see wisdom in staying the course, encouraging improved risk-management processes and better disclosure.
I also see, however, that the time is right for banks and other financial institutions, infrastructure providers, and utilities to work independently and, possibly, collaboratively, to yield a tougher, more resilient financial system.
I am sure that regulators will support those efforts, and I encourage the accounting and auditing community to provide your professional support as well.

The point of these summits is to define emerging issues regarding housing and to discuss their impact on community renewal activities and strategies.
This year the issues focus on home ownership, and I am pleased to give my views.
Home ownership has significant social and economic implications for all of us and ranks high on our list of personal and national priorities.
As you well know, many for-profit, nonprofit, and government entities have committed their energies to increasing homeownership opportunities.
Great progress has been made, with the rate of home ownership reaching new highs each year since 1995.
It is important to examine the factors that have contributed to this success in order to understand how to sustain these gains, respond to changes in market forces, and identify new strategies to promote home ownership.
The Economic and Social Benefits of Home Ownership As the title of your conference underscores, home ownership is often characterized as the "American Dream."
Its achievement by households yields economic and social advantages for both individuals and communities.
For a family, a home is generally its most significant asset and serves as its primary wealth-building vehicle.
Survey results consistently indicate that buying a home ranks among the top motivations for saving.
For communities, studies have shown that higher levels of home ownership improve the stability of neighborhoods, resulting in higher levels of civic activities and tax revenues and lower crime rates.
Much public and private investment is devoted to increasing opportunities for families to buy a home.
A long list of government agencies are involved, ranging from the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) and the Department of Agriculture's Rural Housing Services, to locally driven organizations like LISC and the various Neighborhood Housing Services (NHS) affiliates of the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corporation (NRC).
These groups have created innovative funding programs and intensive financial counseling curricula to support homeownership objectives.
In addition, secondary market institutions such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have provided liquidity to mortgage lenders to facilitate expanded home ownership.
Much has been accomplished through this work and the partnerships with community organizations and mortgage lenders and securitizers.
The Upward Trend of Homeownership Rates Statistics released by the U.S. Census Bureau show increased rates of home ownership.
As of the second quarter of 2001, nearly 68 percent of the population owned their homes, up from 65 percent in 1995.
It is particularly encouraging that this growth was across racial categories, possible evidence of the success of initiatives designed to meet the needs of traditionally underserved markets.
In particular, homeownership rates among black households increased from 43 percent to 48 percent over this period; among Hispanics, from 42 percent to 46 percent; and among lower-income households, from 47 percent to 50 percent.
Various factors have contributed to these favorable trends.
Among the most important were the expansion of the economy, low interest rates, market and product innovation within the mortgage industry, and regulatory changes.
These events have provided the backdrop for both public and private sector organizations to fulfill their mission of promoting home ownership.
Before this year, the economy was expanding smartly.
Generally, with more job security and higher incomes, families seemed to be in better financial positions to purchase a home.
Concurrently, the affordability of mortgages increased as lenders employed automated underwriting tools that allowed them to reduce the costs of processing applications while more effectively measuring credit risk.
Further, the climate of low interest rates increased the affordability of mortgage loans, offering borrowers more financial leeway through lower monthly payments.
Also, competition among lenders increased significantly as the set of mortgage originators expanded and opened up more credit options for consumers.
With increased competition and a continuing agenda of supporting home ownership, the mortgage industry redefined underwriting guidelines to accommodate more borrowers, lowering down-payment requirements and expanding criteria for assessing creditworthiness.
In addition, changes in the regulations that implement the Community Reinvestment Act further encouraged financial institutions to increase mortgage lending to lower-income families and neighborhoods, while enforcement of fair-lending laws underscored the importance of ensuring that credit policies were nondiscriminatory.
All of these forces fueled mortgage lending and ignited activity in the subprime sector of the industry, which significantly increased access to credit for traditionally underserved groups, in particular, borrowers with lower incomes and blemished credit histories.
Yesterday's Loans in Today's Economy With all of these positive developments, we are now concerned with the ability of marginal borrowers to meet their mortgage obligations in today's less ebullient economy.
The sharp decline in equity values reduced the net worth of many households.
In addition, unemployment rates have increased by 1.5 percentage points from this time last year, and consumer debt service burdens have shown a steady rise over the past three years, from about 13 percent in the second quarter of 1998 to 14 percent at the same time in 2001.
During the second quarter of this year, data reported by the Mortgage Bankers Association indicated an increase of 1/4 percentage point in the number of delinquent mortgage loans and a slight rise in credits on which foreclosure had begun.
In addition, HUD data note an increase in the rate of delinquencies for FHA-insured housing loans from just under 6.5 percent in 1998 to nearly 11 percent in the second quarter of 2001.
Meanwhile, the Mortgage Information Corporation reports that 6.6 percent of subprime mortgages were seriously delinquent in June, up a percentage point from the end of last year.
While the full economic implications of the 2001 slowdown and tragic events of September 11 are not yet known, these debt statistics may increase further as households struggle to meet their obligations in the face of significant layoffs.
With these data, we might focus more attention, at least temporarily, on sustaining gains rather than on developing incentives to create new homeowners.
But not all housing statistics are bleak.
Underlying housing values have remained relatively strong even as other economic measurements have softened.
Moreover, home equity levels for lower-income families and black homeowners are still rising according to the most recent data.
Such indicators represent encouragement for organizations like yours to keep up the fight.
Understanding New Opportunities and Meeting New Challenges One of my ex officio duties at the Federal Reserve is to serve on the board of the NRC.
There I have personally observed that a prominent characteristic of affordable-housing developers is their creativity, a trait that has contributed greatly to the record levels of home ownership for lower-income and minority households.
Through the creation of strategic partnerships with financial institutions, government agencies, and secondary market institutions, community-based organizations have created eligible borrowers through homeownership and credit counseling, generated innovative new financing structures to leverage funding, and devised programs to prevent delinquencies and foreclosures.
With these fundamental elements in place, the affordable-housing field is well positioned to deal with the challenges presented by the new economic environment.
Education is a very important theme.
Affordable-housing groups have recognized the value of training in assisting families in their quest for home ownership, and they have also seen its importance in helping families keep their homes.
A recent study released by Freddie Mac confirms the effectiveness of counseling, finding a reduction in delinquency rates of as much as 34 percent among borrowers who participated in homeownership training.
Post-purchase counseling is an integral component of loss-mitigation programs designed to help families work out budgets that will help them meet their mortgage obligations and other housing expenses.
These programs also help borrowers understand options and resources available to them in the event that they fall behind in their payments because of financial emergencies.
For example, borrowers can and do work with creditors to explore options to make the debt more manageable.
Since it is generally desirable for both borrowers and lenders to prevent foreclosures, various strategies may be used to mitigate losses, including restructuring the terms of the loan.
Borrowers who approach their lenders when they know they are unable to meet their payments have a better chance of averting foreclosure.
In fact, a review of HUD data suggests that about 50 percent of loans classified as 90-days delinquent are worked out before foreclosure is initiated.
Post-purchase counseling can also assist borrowers in understanding and exercising these and other loan workout options.
Often training is required before a borrower can take advantage of special loan programs or other financial assistance designed to prevent foreclosure.
For example, participation in extensive counseling is mandatory to qualify for credit under the Home Equity Loss Prevention Initiative, a special lending program developed by Freddie Mac and NRC.
This $20 million loan program was devised to make funding available to homeowners who have high levels of consumer debt, are in need of home improvement financing, or have other financial circumstances that may make them vulnerable to the pressures of unscrupulous lenders.
Incorporating education into such programs helps to improve the functioning of credit markets by creating more-astute borrowers.
Just as homeownership counseling has value, so also do financial literacy efforts have broader benefits.
Educating individuals about the fundamentals of budgeting and saving serves as the foundation for building wealth.
To that end, compelling evidence that financial education matters was revealed in a recent article in the Journal of Public Economics, which found that high-school students who received instruction on financial decisionmaking--including budgeting, credit management, and saving and investing--had significantly higher levels of wealth in adulthood than others.
With a working understanding of and a comfort with financial matters also comes the ability to consume banking services more knowledgeably--from checking and savings accounts to car loans and mortgages.
A familiarity with basic terms enables individuals to shop for the right product at the best price and possibly to save money, results that are especially important for lower-income households.
Further, knowledge of how to find financial information can help consumers to make their way through the wide variety of available financial instruments and the ever-increasing range of providers and to choose products that best suit their needs.
Increasing financial literacy can also foster an appreciation for the need to save, which serves as the basis for wealth accumulation and for preparedness for financial uncertainties and retirement.
Saving provides some measure of financial security in case of a lost job or unexpected necessary expenditures, such as for uninsured medical treatment.
Saving is important in sustaining home ownership among lower-income families.
Although most financial advisers suggest that households should have accumulated savings equal to six to nine months of income to handle financial crises, the typical low-income household has financial assets equal to only about two months of income.
Further, about one-third of low-income households report having no financial assets at all.
These families are living from paycheck to paycheck with no financial cushion of their own for rough times, a situation that puts their continued home ownership in jeopardy.
The Federal Reserve System is among the many organizations working to promote saving as a part of financial literacy training.
Through our Washington office and the twelve Reserve Banks, we sponsor and participate in various financial education initiatives, including launching interactive web sites to help users create their own budgets and participating in local public-private partnerships, such as the Consumer Federation of America's "Cleveland Saves" initiative, to promote savings.
Strategies for the Future There is a valid debate as to whether continuing to increase overall homeownership rates much further is feasible or even desirable.
But surely pockets of the housing market exist in which such efforts can still pay off.
For example, affordable-housing proponents are looking to tap into the burgeoning immigrant markets by tailoring counseling and outreach programs that bridge language and cultural gaps.
Because they are locally run, these programs respond to clients' educational needs with regard to household budgeting, credit management, and the mortgage process.
The basics of these training curricula, which have helped thousands of first-time homebuyers understand and prepare for purchasing a house, can be applied to foreign-born consumers also seeking the benefits of owning a home.
In addition, the relationships that these programs foster among participants and trainers generate valuable insight into lifestyle differences in relation to financial management.
This information can assist underwriters in identifying new ways to measure creditworthiness.
To illustrate, because immigrants often have no experience with our credit system, assessing a credit history may require using payment performance on other obligations.
Funding is always a scarce resource, and affordable-housing lenders are accustomed to identifying new sources for financing additional mortgage loans.
For example, local housing groups, in partnership with local housing authorities, are designing programs that allow renters to apply HUD's Section 8 vouchers toward home ownership.
Two chapters of NHS have designed pilot programs that can serve as a model for other organizations seeking to access this source of funding to offer renters the opportunity to purchase a home.
In addition, LISC's Center for Home Ownership is sponsoring a workshop series to share strategies among affordable-housing providers for using this federal funding source.
As I previously mentioned, affordable-housing organizations have already implemented post-purchase counseling as a strategy for mitigating delinquencies and foreclosures.
Recently, this type of assistance and other intervention programs have been developed to help counter the devastating effects of predatory lending, the most damaging of which is foreclosure.
One example of such a service is NHS's Chicago's Neighborhood Ownership Recovery Mortgage Assistance Loan, or NORMAL.
This funding vehicle was developed to provide alternative financing to borrowers who are in danger of losing their homes as a result of credit deals with unscrupulous lenders.
In partnership with as many as fifteen financial institutions, the NHS of Chicago is helping to preserve home ownership in its lower-income communities by combining actual affordable credit along with its counseling services.
This program illustrates the creativity and responsiveness of affordable-housing groups in their efforts to avert financial tragedy for lower-income families in their communities.
This type of assistance can also serve as a model for educating borrowers and providing resources to families suffering from the financial stress caused by less-favorable economic times.
These examples demonstrate the strength of the infrastructure of the affordable-housing field.

