In my remarks today, I would like to offer some perspectives on the economy and on the business environment that many of you will soon enter.
In doing so, I will be drawing on my experience most recently as an economic policymaker and, before that, in business and banking.
The views I will be expressing are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.
First, I will touch briefly on the current economic situation and on why, despite the weak pace of economic activity in 2001, I see the longer-run outlook for the U.S. economy as quite favorable.
Then I would like to discuss the evolution of the labor market over the past few decades and its implications for someone about to embark on a career.
In doing so, I will attempt to identify the challenges that changes in the work environment pose for new entrants to the workforce, and will offer my perspectives on how you might best meet those challenges.
As you undoubtedly know, the National Bureau of Economic Research has determined that the U.S. economy entered a recession about one year ago, a downturn that ended an unprecedented period of economic expansion.
That remarkable expansion was notable not only for its duration but also for its rapid advances in technology, which fueled a surge in business capital spending, an acceleration in productivity, and rapid gains in real income and wealth.
However, when demand began to slow in late 2000, businesses were faced with uncomfortably high levels of inventories, an oversupply of capital goods, and declining profits.
As a result, businesses made the usual adjustments to these conditions.
They cut production, slashed inventories, reduced capital spending, and laid off workers.
That adjustment process was subsequently exacerbated by the events of September 11.
I am sure that all of you remember the uncertainty and shock of the period immediately after September 11, when our economy came briefly to a near standstill.
Surprisingly, in light of that experience, the latest recession has turned out to be quite mild by the standards of the past thirty years.
Current estimates indicate that real GDP was about flat during the last three quarters of 2001, in contrast with the average decline of 2-1/2 percent posted in the deeper recessions of 1973-75, 1981-82, and 1990-91.
The better performance this time around has come in large part from the solid pace of household spending over the past year.
Buoyed by low interest rates, falling energy prices, and tax cuts, home sales last year remained near a record high, motor vehicle sales peaked at their highest level ever, and overall real personal consumption expenditures increased about 3 percent, a rate well below the pace of the previous few years but still very respectable given the uncertainty of the times.
A more important fact for the longer-run outlook is that, in comparison with the start of other recessions since the mid-1970s, the economy entered the recent slowdown with a much lower rate of inflation and a noticeably higher rate of increase in productivity.
One favorable consequence of the subdued rate of inflation last year was that monetary policy was able to move aggressively to limit the extent of the downturn.
Productivity growth during the recession has been even more strikingly out of character for a standard business cycle.
Typically, a cyclical downturn in business activity leads to declines in or, at best, very anemic gains in labor productivity as firms struggle to adjust to declining demand and less efficient operating rates.
However, by current estimates, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose at a stunning annual rate of about 2-3/4 percent during the last three quarters of 2001--a pace equal to that which businesses were able to achieve over the previous three years of rapid economic expansion.
That the recession does not appear to have much dented the rate of growth in productivity supports the view that the step-up in such growth that emerged in the mid-1990s resulted not only from the rapid expansion of real output but also from a more lasting shift in the structural trend rate of increase.
The fundamental change in the pace of labor productivity seems to confirm what businesses were telling us--that they had used a wide range of technological advances and managerial innovations to improve their supply-chain management and information systems and to better tailor their products and services to meet customer demands.
That is important because faster productivity growth is the crucial determinant of how quickly we can raise our nation's real standard of living.
Productivity improvement has a bit of the same flavor as compound interest: For one year the number does not seem large.
Only when considered over a period of years does it become dramatic.
If productivity increases 1-1/2 percent per year on average, our standard of living will double about every forty-six years--or about every two generations.
But if productivity rises 3 percent per year, the standard of living will double roughly every twenty-three years--or about every generation.
Of course, while I can point to some favorable aspects of our economic performance during the recession, I also recognize that this recession, like the others before it, diminished job opportunities.
Between the business cycle peak last March and this past January, employers shed almost 1-1/2 million jobs, and the unemployment rate rose more than 1 percentage point, to 5.6 percent, its highest level since mid-1995.
Although the unemployment rate is still well below the peak rates reached in any recession since 1948, the comparison may be small comfort to those of you who are about to enter the labor market.
Job opportunities in the current economic environment are obviously less favorable than what we enjoyed in the late 1990s.
As is frequently the case when the economy is transitioning from contraction to expansion, uncertainty about the strength of the recovery is considerable.
However, I am optimistic that, with the adjustments to production and inventories now largely behind us, the longer-run trends in productivity and output will begin to reassert themselves.
And, while job prospects in the very near term may not turn out to be especially favorable, opportunities for building a successful long-term career in today's economy should, over time, be plentiful.
Simply put, I believe that the next few years will prove to be a very good time to be a young person looking for interesting and challenging opportunities in business.
But I would caution you that, even in a prosperous economy, individuals' success varies considerably.
Thus, today's entrants to the workforce need to ask themselves how they can take maximum advantage of the opportunities they encounter.
As I shift, here, from my perspective as an economic policymaker to my perspective as an observer of job-market and business-practice trends, I would like to describe some of the important changes that I have witnessed over the past several decades.
To an economist, the clearest evidence of significant changes in the labor market during the 1980s and 1990s is the gap that opened between higher-paid workers and lower-paid workers.
Most of that increase has resulted from exceptionally rapid gains in earnings for those in the upper half of the wage distribution, but you may be surprised to learn that it also represents a greater dispersion of outcomes for those with similar job titles and levels of education.
This is a striking difference from other times--like those when Ron and I graduated from college.
Let me repeat it with additional emphasis: Any two of you can enter the labor force with similar education backgrounds, and accept jobs that appear to be very much alike, but end up with a wide disparity in take-home pay.
This issue is, I admit, complex, so let me first go over it in economic terms before adding some real-world observations.
In broad terms, an important contributor to the rise in earnings inequality has been an increase in the premiums that firms are willing to pay for higher-level skills.
For example, using education as one very rough measure of skill and using median usual weekly earnings as a wage measure, we can calculate a college wage premium as the ratio of wages for college-educated workers to wages for those with a high-school education.
In 1979, that premium was about 40 percent; by the mid-1990s, it had increased to about 75 percent, and it has remained at that level since.
Cutting the wage data another way, we find that even within the college-educated group, the ratio of median earnings of those at the 90th percentile of the college wage distribution to those at the 10th percentile has increased from 3.4 to 4.1 during the same period.
Employers' needs for skills are often just associated with the capability to use new technologies, and one might assume that the forces driving the dispersion in pay would be strongest for jobs in information technology.
But the skill premium is broader than that.
Even among college graduates and among those with graduate degrees, employers are ready to pay a premium for managers who have the creativity and conceptual ability to apply their training and technological expertise to business lines in non-tech fields.
For example, a recent study using detailed information on managerial pay structures within thirty-nine large companies found that the dispersion of compensation paid to managers within individual firms had increased because of differential rewards to those with higher levels of know-how, problem-solving skills, and accountability.1 Over the past twenty-five years, I have seen striking advances in information technology sweep through the financial services industry, and I have consulted with individuals in a broad range of other industries who report radical changes in how businesses operate--changes in production techniques, inventory management, distribution, sales, and marketing.
Businesses have seen the scope of their products and services expand, and they are reaching a broader range of customers.
And the changes have led these organizations to more highly value the managers and others who have the ability to understand and take advantage of the efficiencies offered by the new technologies.
These changes, in turn, have led firms to reconfigure the way they advance and reward their employees.
In particular, twenty-five years ago, the career path in many businesses looked much more predictable than it does today.
A group of managers, for instance, would be hired by a firm in a particular year.
These managers would tend to move up the management ladder together--usually promoted on the basis of seniority.
In the process, they typically would accumulate broad experiences in a number of business areas within the organization, and a significant percentage would stay with their first employer for an entire career.
In contrast, in today's work place, individuals gain responsibilities and become specialists much faster.
Individuals with similar tenure may be promoted at much different rates, and, as suggested by the statistics showing rising earnings inequality within groups with similar education and experience, salary differentiation among employees is likely to be more pronounced than it used to be.
Predictably, the person who stays with a single employer for an entire career is increasingly rare.
Underlying this change in labor markets is the increasingly competitive environment in which firms find themselves.
Given deregulation, global competition, and the resultant limits on pricing power in many industries, businesses are focusing more on the "bottom line" and are more aggressively searching for ways to improve their efficiency and profitability.
They are asking what each unit within the company is contributing to the value of the firm.
Many executives are increasingly interested in measuring the performance of individual units through the use of advanced accounting techniques--economic value-added systems being one example that has received a great deal of attention.
Firms for which intangibles--brands, patents, software, research programs, and the like--are an important component of value have moved toward integrating, or at least producing, intellectual capital accounts in addition to the usual financial balance sheets.
One result of this greater emphasis on firm value is that the work culture has become much more performance-based than it was twenty-five years ago.
At the business-unit level, sales and marketing groups have had to become more responsive to the needs of their customers.
Project life cycles are shorter now than in the past as firms aim to foster flexibility to keep up with the demand for new products.
Businesses are looking for employees capable of expanding markets for their products and services or of developing innovative ways to reduce costs.
They want to measure what their workers contribute to the value of the firm, and they are increasingly willing to reward their workers according to these contributions.
Thus, as I noted above, firms have made their pay systems much more flexible and now routinely use merit-pay systems that base salary increases and promotions on performance.
In addition, firms have increased their use of variable pay or have raised the potential value of bonus systems already in place.
The most striking example of the expanded use of variable pay has been the sharp rise in stock-option grants in recent years.
According to one survey, the number of U.S. corporations with employee stock ownership plans rose from just 200 in 1974 to roughly 10,000 in 1998.
More important, these stock options are no longer limited to the top executives in a company.
According to a recent KPMG survey of 133 companies, 72 percent of middle managers, 35 percent of all union-exempt employees, and 12 percent of nonexempt employees were eligible to receive stock option awards.
Of course, as those whose options fell out of the money well know, stock options do not automatically translate into higher income.
But for many, stock options paid off handsomely during the late 1990s.
More than 50 percent of adults in the United States now participate in some form of stock ownership in large part because of participation in either stock option programs or retirement plans that invest in stocks.
Another change in recent years is the greater tendency of firms to reconfigure work arrangements, both to increase their ability to adjust labor inputs and as a way to reward valuable employees.
The most obvious examples are the increased reliance by many firms on temporary-help workers and contract employees.
Both provide businesses with greater flexibility to alter the size of their workforces.
But even for permanent employees, the employment relation between the firm and its workers has changed significantly.
The rise in the use of less-traditional conditions of employment is one clear example of this.
In particular, highly valued employees now have greater power to negotiate customized work arrangements suited to their own preferences.
Such arrangements might include telecommuting, flexible hours, developmental leave, and a variety of other possibilities.
Again, the underlying rationale for the firm is to provide a way to reward workers for good performance.
While offering more flexible work environments and performance rewards, employers also have raised their expectations about their employees' willingness to develop their own individual capabilities.
Workers today are pressed to invest in skill development and to seek new opportunities and experiences that will increase their value to the company.
Employees can no longer rely on what they learned in school to suffice for their entire careers.
Rather, today's workers are expected to accumulate an ever-expanding range of skills over their working lives--both on-the-job and through additional training.
The real value of the formal education that you are now receiving is that, with it, you will be able to enter jobs in which you very likely will be challenged to learn more, to try new assignments, and to take some risks.
One of the exciting--and admittedly unsettling--aspects of the economy in recent years is that we cannot predict exactly where technical change will take us, even in the fairly near term.
That is, we cannot forecast what our business practices and products will look like only a decade ahead--over a period of time, say, in which your careers will have just begun.
I have witnessed such a transformation as technological change has swept through the banking and financial services industries over the past ten years, and I have been a more-distant observer of the process in many other exciting areas--biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, and agriculture, to name just a few.
In sum, I will offer this advice as you make the transition from your university training to business.
First, take with you not simply your BA or MBA but also a willingness to be flexible, a keen eye for new opportunities to increase your value on the job, and an appetite for lifelong learning.
Second, leave here knowing your current strengths and what you enjoy, but be open to change.
As those strengths and preferences are tested on the job, you should be looking for opportunities that kindle your creative spark and, as a consequence, give you great satisfaction.
And if that process leads you in a different direction, do not be afraid to change course and follow it.
Footnotes 1.
K.C.

And, generally speaking, the resulting structure of business incentives, reporting, and accountability has served us well.
We could not have achieved our current level of national productivity if corporate governance had been deeply flawed.
And yet, our most recent experiences with the bankruptcy of Enron and, preceding that, several lesser such incidents suggest that the governance of our corporations has strayed from our perceptions of how it is supposed to work.
By law, shareholders own our corporations and, ideally, corporate managers should be working on behalf of shareholders to allocate business resources to their optimum use.
But as our economy has grown, and our business units have become ever larger, de facto shareholder control has diminished: Ownership has become more dispersed and few shareholders have sufficient stakes to individually influence the choice of boards of directors or chief executive officers.
The vast majority of corporate share ownership is for investment, not to achieve operating control of a company.
Thus, it has increasingly fallen to corporate officers, especially the chief executive officer, to guide the business, hopefully in what he or she perceives to be in the best interests of shareholders.
Indeed, the boards of directors appointed by shareholders are in the overwhelming majority of cases chosen from the slate proposed by the CEO.
The CEO sets the business strategy of the organization and strongly influences the choice of the accounting practices that measure the ongoing degree of success or failure of that strategy.
Outside auditors are generally chosen by the CEO or by an audit committee of CEO-chosen directors.
Shareholders usually perfunctorily affirm such choices.
To be sure, a CEO can maintain control over corporate governance only so long as companies are not demonstrably in difficulty.
When companies do run into trouble, the carte blanche granted CEOs by shareholders is withdrawn.
Existing shareholders, or successful hostile bidders for the corporation, usually then displace the board of directors and the CEO.
Such changes in corporate leadership have been relatively rare but, more often than not, have contributed to a more-effective allocation of corporate capital.
For the most part, despite providing limited incentives for board members to safeguard shareholder interests, this paradigm has worked well.
We are fortunate, for financial markets have had no realistic alternative other than to depend on the chief executive officer to ensure an objective evaluation of the prospects of the corporation.
Apart from a relatively few large institutional investors, not many existing or potential shareholders have the research capability to analyze corporate reports and thus to judge the investment value of a corporation.
This vitally important service has become dominated by firms in the business of underwriting or selling securities.
But, as we can see from recent history, long-term earnings forecasts of brokerage-based securities analysts, on average, have been persistently overly optimistic.
Three- to five-year earnings forecasts for each of the S&P 500 corporations, compiled from projections of securities analysts by I/B/E/S, averaged almost 12 percent per year between 1985 and 2001.
Actual earnings growth over that period averaged about 7 percent.
Perhaps the last sixteen years, for which systematic data have been available, are an historical aberration.
But the persistence of the bias year after year suggests that it more likely results, at least in part, from the proclivity of firms that sell securities to retain and promote analysts with an optimistic inclination.
Moreover, the bias apparently has been especially large when the brokerage firm issuing the forecast also serves as an underwriter for the company’s securities.
The performance of securities analysts may improve as a result of the recent joint initiative by the National Association of Securities Dealers and the New York Stock Exchange to require brokerage firms to include in research reports the distribution of the firms’ ratings, among “buy,” “sell,” and “hold,” for example.
Brokerage firms must also include in research reports a record that indicates when an analyst assigned or changed a rating for a company.
I suspect that with the underlying database publicly available, it is just a matter of time before the ex post results of analysts’ recommendations are compiled and published on a regular basis.
I venture to say that with such transparency, the current upward bias of analysts’ earnings projections would diminish rather rapidly, because investment firms are well aware that security analysis without credibility has no market value.
* * * Prior to the past several decades, earnings forecasts were not nearly so important a factor in assessing the value of corporations.
In fact, I do not recall price-to-earnings ratios as a prominent statistic in the 1950s.
Instead, investors tended to value stocks on the basis of their dividend yields.
Since the early 1980s, however, corporations increasingly have been paying out cash to shareholders in the form of share repurchases rather than dividends.
The marginal individual tax rate on dividends, with rare exceptions, has always been higher than the marginal tax rate on capital gains that repurchases create by raising per share earnings through share reduction.
But, until the early 1980s, share repurchases were frowned upon by the Securities and Exchange Commission, and companies that repurchased shares took the risk of being investigated for price manipulation.
In 1982, the SEC gave companies a safe harbor to conduct share repurchases without risk of investigation.
This action prompted a marked shift toward repurchases in lieu of dividends to avail shareholders of a lower tax rate on their cash receipts.
More recently, a desire to manage shareholder dilution from the rising incidence of employee stock options has also spurred repurchases.
As a consequence, dividend payout ratios, which in decades past averaged about 55 percent, have in recent years fallen on average to about 35 percent.
But because share prices have risen so much more than earnings in recent years, dividend yields--the ratio of dividends per share to a company’s share price--have fallen appreciably more than the payout ratio.
A half-century ago, for example, dividend yields on stocks typically averaged 6 percent.
Today such yields are barely above 1 percent.
The sharp fall in dividend payout ratios and yields has dramatically shifted the focus of stock price evaluation toward earnings.
Unlike cash dividends, whose value is unambiguous, there is no unambiguously “correct” value of earnings.
Although most pretax profits reflect cash receipts less out-of-pocket cash costs, a significant part results from changes in balance-sheet valuations.
The values of almost all assets are based on the assets’ ability to produce future income.
But an appropriate judgment of that asset value depends critically on a forecast of forthcoming events, which by their nature are uncertain.
A bank, for example, books interest paid on a loan as current revenue.
However, if the borrower subsequently defaults, that presumed interest payment would, in retrospect, be seen as a partial return of principal.
We seek to cope with this uncertainty by constructing loan reserves, but the adequacy of those reserves is also subject to a forecast.
Depreciation charges against income, based on book values, are very crude approximations of deterioration in the economic value of physical plant.
The actual deterioration will not be known until the asset is retired or sold.
And projections of future investment returns on defined-benefit pension plans markedly affect corporate pension contributions and, hence, pre-tax profits.
Thus, how one chooses to evaluate the future income potential of the balance sheet has a significant impact on current reported earnings.
* * * Earnings uncertainty has been particularly elevated in recent years.
Improvements in information technology have created new opportunities for innovative companies, but an environment of rapid technological change is also one in which the resulting profit opportunities are difficult to assess and project.
In particular, such rapid change has heightened the potential for competitors to encroach on established market positions.
This process of capital reallocation has not only increased the long-term earnings growth potential of the economy as a whole, but has widened as well the degree of uncertainty for individual firms.
Not surprisingly then, with the longer-term outlook increasingly amorphous, the level and recent growth of short-term earnings have taken on especial significance in stock price evaluation, with quarterly earnings reports subject to anticipation, rumor, and “spin.” Such tactics, presumably, attempt to induce investors to extrapolate short-term trends into a favorable long-term view that would raise the current stock price.
CEOs, under increasing pressure from the investment community to meet short-term elevated expectations, in too many instances have been drawn to accounting devices whose sole purpose is arguably to obscure potential adverse results.
Outside auditors, on several well-publicized occasions, have sanctioned such devices, allegedly for fear of losing valued corporate clients.
Thus, it is not surprising that since 1998 earnings restatements have proliferated.
This situation is a far cry from earlier decades when, if my recollection serves me correctly, firms competed on the basis of which one had the most conservative set of books.
Short-term stock price values then seemed less of a focus than maintaining unquestioned credit worthiness.
* * * A change in behavior, however, may already be in train.
The sharp decline in stock and bond prices following Enron’s collapse has chastened many of the uncritical practitioners of questionable accounting.
Corporate reputation is fortunately reemerging out of the ashes of the Enron debacle as a significant economic value.
Markets are evidently beginning to put a price-earnings premium on reported earnings that appear free of spin.
Likewise, perceptions of the reliability of firms’ financial statements are increasingly reflected in yield spreads on corporate bonds.
Corporate governance has doubtless already measurably improved as a result of this greater market discipline in the wake of recent events.
But the Congress is clearly signaling that more needs to be done.
I hope that any legislative and regulatory initiatives will move to further realign current practice with the de jure governance model that served us well in generations past.
Most success in that direction would seem to come primarily from changes in incentives for corporate officers.
In particular, as President Bush has suggested, defining more clearly the duties of CEOs with respect to accounting and disclosure appears appropriate.
There are, doubtless, other measures that could reinforce the aforementioned Enron-induced market incentives for disclosures and thereby strengthen investors’ trust, which is so essential to the effective functioning of free-market capitalism.
We have to be careful, however, not to look to a significant expansion of regulation as the solution to current problems, especially as price-earnings ratios increasingly reflect the market’s perception of the quality of accounting.
Regulation has, over the years, proven only partially successful in dissuading individuals from playing with the rules of accounting.
* * * Some changes, however, appear overdue.
In principle, stock-option grants, properly constructed, can be highly effective in aligning corporate officers’ incentives with those of shareholders.
Regrettably, the current accounting for options has created some perverse effects on the quality of corporate disclosures that, arguably, is further complicating the evaluation of earnings and hence diminishing the effectiveness of published income statements in supporting good corporate governance.
The failure to include the value of most stock-option grants as employee compensation and, hence, to subtract them from pretax profits, has increased reported earnings and presumably stock prices.
This would be the case even if offsets for expired, unexercised options were made.
The Financial Accounting Standards Board proposed to require expensing in the early to middle 1990s but abandoned the proposal in the face of significant political pressure.
The Federal Reserve staff estimates that the substitution of unexpensed option grants for cash compensation added about 2-1/2 percentage points to reported annual growth in earnings of our larger corporations between 1995 and 2000.
Many argue that this distortion to reported earnings growth contributed to a misallocation of capital investment, especially in high-tech firms.
If market participants indeed have been misled, that, in itself, should be surprising, for there is little mystery about the effect of stock-option grants on earnings reported to shareholders.
Accounting rules require that enough data on option grants be reported in footnotes to corporate financial statements to enable analysts to calculate reasonable estimates of their effect on earnings.
Some have argued that Black-Scholes option pricing, the prevailing means of estimating option expense, is approximate.
But so is a good deal of all other earnings estimation, as I indicated earlier.
Moreover, every corporation does report an implicit estimate of option expense on its income statement.
That number for most, of course, is zero.
Are option grants truly without any value?
Critics of option expensing have also argued that expensing will make raising capital more difficult.
But expensing is only a bookkeeping transaction.
Nothing real is changed in the actual operations or cash flow of the corporation.
If investors are dissuaded by lower reported earnings as a result of expensing, it means only that they were less informed than they should have been.
Capital employed on the basis of misinformation is likely to be capital misused.
Critics of expensing also argue that the availability of options enables corporations to attract more-productive employees.
That may well be true.
But option expensing in no way precludes the issuance of options.
To be sure, lower reported earnings as a result of expensing could temper stock price increases and thereby exacerbate the effects of share dilution.
That, presumably, could inhibit option issuance.
But again, that inhibition would be appropriate, because it would reflect the correction of misinformation.
* * * In a further endeavor to align boards of directors with shareholders, rather than management, considerable attention has been placed on filling board seats with so-called independent directors.
However, in my experience, few directors in modern times have seen their interests as separate from those of the CEO, who effectively appointed them and, presumably, could remove them from future slates of directors submitted to shareholders.
I do not deny that laws could be passed to force selection of slates of directors who are patently independent of CEO influence and thereby significantly diminish the role of the CEO.
I suspect, however, that such an initiative, while ensuring independent directors, would create competing power centers within a corporation, and thus dilute coherent control and impair effective governance.
* * * After considerable soul-searching and many congressional hearings, the current CEO-dominant paradigm, with all its faults, will likely continue to be viewed as the most viable form of corporate governance for today’s world.
The only credible alternative is for large--primarily institutional--shareholders to exert far more control over corporate affairs than they appear to be willing to exercise.
Fortunately, it seems clear that, if the CEO chooses to govern in the interests of shareholders, he or she can, by example and through oversight, induce corporate colleagues and outside auditors to behave in ways that produce de facto governance that matches the de jure shareholder-led model.
Such CEO leadership is critical for achieving the optimum allocation of the nation’s corporate capital.
* * * Before concluding, I should like to emphasize that a market economy requires a structure of formal rules--a law of contracts, bankruptcy statutes, a code of shareholder rights--to name but a few.
But rules cannot substitute for character.
In virtually all transactions, whether with customers or with colleagues, we rely on the word of those with whom we do business.
If we could not do so, goods and services could not be exchanged efficiently.
Companies run by people with high ethical standards arguably do not need detailed rules to act in the long-run interests of shareholders and, presumably, themselves.
But, regrettably, human beings come as we are--some with enviable standards, but others who continually seek to cut corners.
Yet there can be only one set of rules for corporate governance, and it must apply to all.
Crafting the rules to provide the proper mix of regulatory and market-based incentives and penalties has never been easy.
And I suspect that even after we get beyond the Enron debacle, crafting and updating such rules will continue to be a challenge.
Footnotes 1.

