I myself was reminded of this by an item on the web site of Her Majesty's Treasury.
"In 1711," the item notes, "the Treasury unveiled a scheme to secure government debt by authorising its subscription into the capital of the South Sea Company--government creditors received stock in the company.
When the South Sea Bubble burst in 1720, however, thousands of investors were affected and the Chancellor of the Exchequer was sent to the Tower of London."
Although the web site does not elaborate, that eighteenth century chancellor was guilty of dubious practices that appear eerily contemporary.
Fortunately, modern chancellors, including the eminent incumbent, appear at the Tower these days in a more benign context.
In a more serious vein, I am daily reminded of the special relationship the Federal Reserve has had over the decades with decisionmakers from the British government.
Literally twenty feet from my desk are plaques commemorating the numerous World War II meetings in our Board Room between the combined military chiefs of the United States and Great Britain that in the words on one plaque, "... set the pattern for allied collaboration and the successful prosecution of World War II."
But the Federal Reserve's association with Britain's monetary authorities goes back even further.
The tie between the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve was cemented during the 1920s in that extraordinary relationship between Benjamin Strong, the President of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, and Montague Norman, the Governor of the Bank of England.
Their correspondence yields quite fascinating insight into the way they interpreted events that are now important history.
The ties developed then between the Federal Reserve and British monetary authorities endure to this day.
The mutual trust reached a point that in 1999 the Bank of England asked Donald Kohn, then head of our Monetary Affairs Division, and now a governor, to review key aspects of the Bank of England's monetary policy procedures and make recommendations for improvement.
We were duly impressed because, to us at the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England projects a nearly mythical presence as the developer of much of the central banking we all practice today.
The Federal Reserve's close relationship with the Bank of England and other major central banks has been enhanced through periodic meetings at the Bank for International Settlements in Basel since 1963.
But it has been over only the past quarter century, with the emergence of regular meetings of the finance ministers and central bankers of the Group of Five, and later the Group of Seven, that interactions between the Federal Reserve and the British Treasury and other major finance ministries have taken on special importance.
Of course, some of us meet under the auspices of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, and we all participate in the deliberations of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
But the Group of Seven has surfaced as the most significant forum through which both finance ministers and central bankers from the major countries coordinate on economic issues.
International coordination has also been advanced with the creation of the Financial Stability Forum, an initiative of the G-7 that draws on the Secretariat of the Bank for International Settlements.
And the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision that evolved out of initial explorations of the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England has broadened international bank supervisory coordination.
In recent years, both the G-7 and the BIS have reached out to expand our contact with ministers and governors of developing countries.
A new group, the Group of Twenty, encompasses many industrial countries and a number of developing nations.
Today's remarkably sophisticated international financial system, that all these bodies oversee, took root several centuries ago within hailing distance of Her Majesty's Treasury.
The rule of law and protection of property rights attracted transactions to the London market and--notwithstanding the one incident of questionable behavior in 1720 noted earlier--the British tradition of trust, integrity, and fair dealing has been an important component of the City's success.
London, and other British financial centers, had developed by World War I into the dominant lender to the world, accounting for half of the world's trade financing and, despite its loss of empire, London remains, with New York, at the top of the world's financial pyramid.
The City has a long tradition of leading the world in foreign exchange trading and currently conducts twice the volume of New York despite the fact that the U.S. dollar is the leading traded currency by far in foreign exchange transactions.
London is the world's center for over the counter derivatives trading--again with double the share of the trading in similar instruments conducted in New York.
Moreover, a substantial share of the world's securities trading is channeled through the City.
London has stayed on top in the provision of financial services despite the emergence of the euro, which some expected would divert a significant share of foreign exchange trading to a single center on the continent.
Although financial sector activity in Frankfurt has increased substantially in the past few years, largely reflecting the growing importance of the euro, trading volumes there are still well below those of London and New York.
Another potential challenge to the City's prominence in the provision of financial services has been the telecommunications revolution, which presumably should diminish the need for physical proximity to conduct financial transactions.

A never-ending stream of innovation has led inexorably to expanded trade and improved productivity in many nations throughout the world.
Today, we can see on the horizon vast new means of communicating and computing, practical applications of advances in biotechnology, and doubtless many other innovations.
But a half-century from now, the goods and services that we produce and consume will, to a significant extent, reflect applications of insights not yet formed or even imagined.
Could the residents of sophisticated eighteenth-century London, prior to Sir William Herschel's demonstration of invisible radiation, even contemplate the existence of radio waves that would reach around the world?
I still have trouble grasping how the shortwave transmissions of the BBC travel thousands of miles to find their way to my bedroom at night to be picked up by my transistor shortwave radio.
Our modern electronic devices work according to the laws of quantum mechanics, which were laid out in the 1920s by Erwin Schrodinger, Werner Heisenberg, and Paul Dirac; they postulated that at the subatomic level the world did not obey the centuries-old Newtonian views of how the forces of the universe function.
The major revolutions of Albert Einstein had occurred a few years earlier and nuclear power was a generation or so beyond.
I raise such examples only to emphasize that we cannot realistically project future innovations and the potential for those innovations to create economic value.
Novel insights, by definition, have not previously entered anyone's consciousness.
However, that unanticipated discoveries of how to create wealth will emerge in the decades ahead no longer seems as conjectural as it may have, for example, before the Industrial Revolution.
Full realization of the benefits of past innovations, and of those our grandchildren will experience, will depend on the forces of globalization already in play to develop the commercial potential of new technologies and to transmit the application of these technologies across our economies.
By spreading expertise and expanding the division of labor and specialization to ever broader markets, those forces led to enhanced trade in the past half-century, which in turn has dramatically elevated the standards of living of nations that have chosen that path forward.
But an ever burgeoning global financial system also inevitably raises the potential of increasing systemic risk.
At Lancaster House later this evening, I will be discussing some of the new tools of risk management and the principles that should guide the containment of systemic risk and its allocation between the private and public sectors.
Here I would like to focus on a narrower, but nonetheless increasingly important, issue: the nexus of risk-taking, regulation, innovation, and wealth creation.
Owing to persistent advances in information and computing technologies, the structure of our financial institutions is continuously changing, I trust for the better.
But that evolution in financial structure has also meant that supervision and regulation must be continually changing in order to respond adequately to these developments.
In today's markets, for example, there is an increased reliance on private counterparty surveillance as the primary means of financial control.
Governments supplement private surveillance when they judge that market imperfections could lead to sub-optimal economic performance.
But let us consider now another aspect of market regulation efforts: transparency.
There should not be much dispute that markets function best when the participants are fully informed.
Yet, paradoxically, the full disclosure of what some participants know can undermine incentives to take risk, a precondition to economic growth.
No one can deny that fully informed market participants will generate the most efficient pricing of resources and the most efficient allocation of capital.
Moreover, it could be argued that, if all information held by individual buyers or sellers became available to all participants, the pricing structure would more closely reflect the underlying balance of supply and demand.
Thus full information would appear to be the unambiguous objective.
But should it be?
Take, for example, the real estate developer who conceives of an innovative project that will significantly raise the value of the land on which it will be situated--provided that the site possesses suitable characteristics.
Suppose further that it is costly for the developer to determine whether a given site is suitable.
If he or she discovers a suitable site and is able to quietly purchase the land from its current owners without revealing the value of the project, the developer makes a substantial profit, and the community overall presumably benefits from improved land use.
But what if, before the purchase of the land, the developer was required to disclose his or her purchase intentions and, in particular, the value enhancement created by the project?
The sellers then seeing the bigger picture would elevate their offers sufficiently high to extract the full value of the innovation from the developer.
Under these circumstances, would any projects go forward?
Clearly not, because developers would be unwilling to bear the cost of evaluating potential sites knowing that they would reap none of the benefit of discovering suitable ones.
A requirement for fuller disclosure of the potential, heretofore undiscovered value of the land would engender neither more disclosure nor improved land use.
An example more immediate to current regulatory concerns is the issue of regulation and disclosure in the over-the-counter derivatives market.
By design, this market, presumed to involve dealings among sophisticated professionals, has been largely exempt from government regulation.
In part, this exemption reflects the view that professionals do not require the investor protections commonly afforded to markets in which retail investors participate.
But regulation is not only unnecessary in these markets, it is potentially damaging, because regulation presupposes disclosure and forced disclosure of proprietary information can undercut innovations in financial markets just as it would in real estate markets.
All participants in competitive markets seek innovations that yield above-normal returns.
In generally efficient markets, few find such profits.
But those that do exploit such discoveries earn an abnormal return for doing so.
In the process, they improve market efficiency by providing services not previously available.
Most financial innovations in over-the-counter derivatives involve new ways to disperse risk.
Moreover, our constantly changing financial environment supplies a steady stream of new opportunities for innovation to address market imperfections.
Innovative products temporarily earn a quasi-monopoly rent.
But eventually arbitrage removes the market imperfection that yielded the above-normal return.
In the end, the innovative product becomes a "commodity" made available to all at a modest, fully competitive profit.
To require disclosure of the structure of the innovative product either before or after its introduction would immediately eliminate the quasi-monopoly return and discourage future endeavors to innovate in that area.
The result is that market imperfections would remain unaddressed and the allocation of capital to its most-productive uses would be thwarted.
Even requiring disclosure on a confidential basis solely to regulatory authorities may well inhibit such risk-taking.
Innovators can never be fully confident, justly or otherwise, of the security of the information.
Regulators may not always be able to differentiate easily between secrecy to protect intellectual property and secrecy to deceive or to commit outright fraud.
Yet a supervisory system must make that distinction as best it can.
There is nothing unusual about making difficult tradeoffs in regulation.
In fact, it is the rule rather than the exception for most regulatory regimes--whether in the financial or nonfinancial sectors of our economies.
Indeed, such tradeoffs, in a wider sense, determine the differing regulatory regimes we see around the world.
Those differences in regimes reflect largely attitudes toward competition.
Competition is the facilitator of innovation.
And creative destruction, the process by which less-productive capital is displaced with innovative cutting-edge technologies, is the driving force of wealth creation.
Thus, from the perspective of aggregate wealth creation, the more competition the better.
But unfettered competitive capitalism is by no means fully accepted as the optimal economic paradigm, at least as yet.
Some of those involved in public policy often see competition as too frenetic.
This different perspective is captured most clearly for me in a soliloquy attributed to a prominent European leader several years ago.
He asked, "What is the market?
It is the law of the jungle, the law of nature.
And what is civilization?
It is the struggle against nature."
A major determinant of regulatory regimes is how a rule of law is applied to strike a balance between the perceived benefits of wholly unfettered markets and the perceived societal costs of overly fierce competition.
There remains an uneasy balance in most countries between unleashing the forces of competition and reining them in when they are perceived to threaten the social order.
With markets continuously in evolution and the political perceptions of the proper extent of regulation also changeable, it is no wonder that our regulations always seem to be in flux.
Such flux must be kept to a minimum to avoid fostering uncertainty among innovators.
Moreover, shifting regulatory schemes unavoidably leave obsolescent regulations in their wake.
Business people in the United States complain, perhaps with some exaggeration, that so many regulations are on the books that they are probably at all times unknowingly in violation of some of them.
We at the Federal Reserve endeavor every five years to review all our existing regulations in order to revise or rescind those that are out-of-date.
This schedule of review has worked well for us, and it is probably a good practice to apply to regulatory systems generally.
The extent of government intervention in markets to control risk-taking is, at the end of the day, a tradeoff between economic growth with its associated potential instability and a more civil but less stressful way of life with a lower standard of living.
Those of us who support market capitalism in its more-competitive forms might argue that unfettered markets create a degree of wealth that fosters a more civilized existence.

Fostered by a lowering of trade barriers, exchange of goods and services across borders has increased far faster than world gross domestic product.
But what is even more remarkable is how large the scale of cross-border finance has become, relative to the value of the trade that it finances.
To be sure, much global finance reflects growing investment portfolios, some doubtless with a speculative component.
But, at bottom, such finance is a central element of the systems that support the efficient international movement of goods and services.
We strongly suspect, though we do not know for sure, that the accelerating expansion of global finance may be indispensable to the continued rapid growth in world trade in goods and services.
It appears increasingly evident that many forms and layers of financial intermediation will be required if we are to capture the full benefit of our advances in technology and trade.
Indeed, the potential for a far larger world financial system than currently exists is suggested by the seemingly outsized implicit compensation for risk associated with many investments worldwide.
But, as in all aspects of life, expansion of one’s activities beyond previously explored territory involves taking risks.
And risk by its nature has carried, and always will carry with it, the possibility of adverse outcomes.
Accordingly, for globalization to continue to foster expanding living standards, risk must be managed ever more effectively as the century unfolds.
The development of our paradigms for containing risk has emphasized, and will, of necessity, continue to emphasize dispersion of risk to those willing, and presumably able, to bear it.
If risk is properly dispersed, shocks to the overall economic system will be better absorbed and less likely to create cascading failures that could threaten financial stability.
The broad success of that paradigm seemed to be most evident in the United States over the past two and one-half years.
Despite the draining impact of a loss of $8 trillion of stock market wealth, a sharp contraction in capital investment and, of course, the tragic events of September 11, 2001, our economy held firm.
Importantly, despite significant losses, no major U.S. financial institution was driven to default.
Similar observations pertain to much of the rest of the world but to a somewhat lesser extent than to the United States.
These episodes suggest a marked increase over the past two or three decades in the ability of modern economies to absorb shocks.
To be sure, the recent tepid pace of world economic activity has raised concerns that the full cycle of the past decade has yet to be definitively concluded.
But the increased resiliency now clearly evident arguably supports the view that the world economy already has become more flexible.
This favorable turn of events has doubtless been materially assisted by the recent financial innovations that have afforded lenders the opportunity to become considerably more diversified and borrowers to become far less dependent on specific institutions or markets for funds.
A major contributor to the dispersion of risk in recent decades has been the wide-ranging development of markets in securitized bank loans, credit card receivables, and commercial and residential mortgages.
These markets have tailored the risks associated with holding such assets to fit the preferences of a broader spectrum of investors.
Especially important in the United States has been the flexibility and size of the secondary mortgage market.
Since early 2000, this market has facilitated the large debt-financed extraction of home equity that, in turn, has been so critical in supporting consumer outlays in the United States throughout the recent period of cyclical stress.
This market’s flexibility has been particularly enhanced by extensive use of interest rate swaps and options to hedge maturity mismatches and prepayment risk.
Financial derivatives, more generally, have grown at a phenomenal pace over the past fifteen years.
Conceptual advances in pricing options and other complex financial products, along with improvements in computer and telecommunications technologies, have significantly lowered the costs of, and expanded the opportunities for, hedging risks that were not readily deflected in earlier decades.
Moreover, the counterparty credit risk associated with the use of derivative instruments has been mitigated by legally enforceable netting and through the growing use of collateral agreements.
These increasingly complex financial instruments have been especial contributors, particularly over the past couple of stressful years, to the development of a far more flexible, efficient, and resilient financial system than existed just a quarter-century ago.
Greater resilience has been evident in many segments of the financial markets.
One prominent example is the response of financial markets to a burgeoning and then deflating telecom sector.
Worldwide borrowing by telecom firms in all currencies amounted to more than the equivalent of a trillion U.S. dollars during the years 1998 to 2001.
The financing of the massive expansion of fiber-optic networks and heavy investments in third-generation mobile-phone licenses by European firms strained debt markets.
At the time, the financing of these investments was widely seen as prudent because the telecom borrowers had very high valuations in equity markets that could facilitate a stock issuance, if needed, to take down bank loans and other debt.
In the event, of course, prices of telecom stocks collapsed, and many firms went bankrupt.
In decades past, such a sequence would have been a recipe for creating severe distress in the wider financial system.
However, a significant amount of exposure to telecom debt had been laid off through instruments that mitigate credit risk, such as credit default swaps, collateralized debt obligations, and credit-linked notes.
Taken together, these instruments appear to have significantly reduced telecom loan concentrations and the associated stress on banks and other financial institutions.
More generally, such instruments appear to have effectively spread losses from defaults by Enron, Global Crossing, Railtrack, WorldCom, and Swissair in recent months from financial institutions with largely short-term leverage to insurance firms, pension funds, or others with diffuse long-term liabilities or no liabilities at all.
In particular, the still relatively small but rapidly growing market in credit derivatives has to date functioned well, with payouts proceeding smoothly for the most part.
Obviously, this market is still too new to have been tested in a widespread down-cycle for credit.
But so far, so good.
The growing prominence of the market for credit derivatives is attributable not only to its ability to disperse risk but also to the information it contributes to enhanced risk management by banks and other financial intermediaries.
Credit default swaps, for example, are priced to reflect the probability of the net loss from the default of an ever broadening array of borrowers, both financial and nonfinancial.
As the market for credit default swaps expands and deepens, the collective knowledge held by market participants is exactly reflected in the prices of these derivative instruments.
They offer significant supplementary information about credit risk to a bank’s loan officer, for example, who heretofore had to rely mainly on in-house credit analysis.
To be sure, loan officers have always looked to the market prices of the stocks and bonds of a potential borrower for guidance, but none directly answered the key question for any prospective loan: What is the probable net loss in a given time frame?
Credit default swaps, of course, do just that and presumably in the process embody all relevant market prices of the financial instruments issued by potential borrowers.
Price trends of default swaps have been particularly sensitive to concerns about corporate governance in recent months.
The perceived risk of default of both financial and nonfinancial firms has risen markedly in the wake of company-threatening scandals, though levels remain moderate.
* * * Derivatives, by construction, are highly leveraged, a condition that is both a large benefit and an Achilles’ heel.
The benefits of risk dispersion are accomplished without holding massive positions in the underlying financial instruments.
Yet, too often in our financially checkered past, the access to such leverage has induced speculative excesses that have led to financial grief.
We are scarcely likely to reform the underlying human traits that lead to excess, but we do need to buttress our risk management capabilities as best we can to delimit such detours from the path of balanced growth.
More fundamentally, we should recognize that if we choose to enjoy the advantages of a system of leveraged financial intermediaries, the burden of managing risk in the financial system will not lie with the private sector alone.
Leveraging always carries with it the remote possibility of a chain reaction, a cascading sequence of defaults that will culminate in financial implosion if it proceeds unchecked.
Only a central bank, with its unlimited power to create money, can with a high probability thwart such a process before it becomes destructive.
Hence, central banks have, of necessity, been drawn into becoming lenders of last resort.
It was the Bank of England that established the concept during the financial crises of the nineteenth century, even though it was at the time privately owned.
When a prominent London discount house failed in 1866, the Bank of England lent a substantial share of its reserves to other financial firms to ensure that panic did not spread.
It further established its role as lender of last resort in 1890, when Baring Brothers was threatened.
The Bank initiated a successful rescue operation by establishing a guarantee fund to which other financial institutions also contributed.
Writing in 1915 about that episode, Ellis Powell said, “The Bank is not a single combatant who must fight or retire, but the leader of the most colossal agglomeration of financial power which the world has so far witnessed.” Thus, although the Bank of England was not nationalized until 1946, it had long before taken on one of the main responsibilities of modern central banks: ensuring financial stability by serving as the lender of last resort.
But implicit in such a role is the assumption that the burden of risk arising from extreme outcomes will in some way be allocated between the public and private sectors.
Thus, central banks are led to provide what essentially amounts to catastrophic financial insurance coverage.
Such a public subsidy should be reserved for only the rarest of occasions.
If the owners or managers of private financial institutions were to anticipate being propped up frequently by government support, it would only encourage reckless and irresponsible practices.
In theory, the allocation of responsibility for risk bearing between the private sector and the central bank depends upon the private cost of capital.
To attract capital, or at least retain it, a private financial institution must earn at minimum the overall economy’s rate of return, adjusted for risk.
In competitive financial markets, the greater the leverage, the higher must be the rate of return on the invested capital before adjustment for risk.
If private financial institutions have to absorb all financial risk, then the degree to which they can leverage will be limited, the financial sector smaller, and its contribution to the economy more limited.
On the other hand, if central banks effectively insulate private institutions from the largest potential losses, however incurred, increased laxity could threaten a major drain on taxpayers, excess creation of money by the central bank, or both.
In the end, we would be faced with a severe misallocation of real capital.
In practice, the policy choice of how much, if any, extreme market risk should be absorbed by government authorities is fraught with many complexities.
Yet we central bankers make this decision every day, either explicitly, or implicitly through inadvertence.
Moreover, we can never know for sure whether the decisions we make are appropriate.
The question is not whether our actions are seen to have been necessary in retrospect; the absence of a fire does not mean that we should not have paid for fire insurance.
Rather, the question is whether, ex ante, the probability of a systemic collapse was sufficient to warrant intervention.
Often, we cannot wait to see whether, in hindsight, the problem will be judged to have been an isolated event and largely benign.
Thus, governments, including central banks, must balance the responsibilities they have been given related to their banking and financial systems.
We have the responsibility to prevent major financial market disruptions through development and enforcement of prudent regulatory standards and, if necessary in rare circumstances, through direct intervention in market events.
But we also have the responsibility to ensure that the regulatory framework permits private sector institutions to take prudent and appropriate risks, even though such risks will sometimes result in unanticipated bank losses or even bank failures.
The inevitable rise in potential systemic risks as the international financial system inexorably expands can be contained by improvements in effective risk management in the private sector, improvements in domestic bank supervision and regulation, and, should it be necessary, by central banks acting as lenders of last resort.
In the past two decades, bank supervisors in developed countries have worked together, through the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, to improve bank supervision and regulation.
This effort, which was the outgrowth of cooperation between U.S. and U.K. supervisory authorities, is ongoing and places priority on encouraging banks to further improve their risk management systems.
Similar efforts toward shared objectives among individual central banks should also improve protection against systemic risk on an international level.
* * * Allowing free markets to foster an ever-expanding international division of labor will in the future, as in the past, be fraught with controversy even as the evidence of the success of such a paradigm mounts.
The wealth creation of globalization results from cutting-edge technologies displacing obsolescent facilities.
But that implies significant hardship for workers who lose their jobs.
These inevitable victims of the process of creative destruction must be aided not only for humanitarian reasons, but also to prevent our democratic institutions, in frustration, from turning to self-destructive protectionism.
Such concerns underscore the fact that the battle for free markets is never definitively won.
It is thus incumbent on those who seek to advance human welfare through the global system of free market trading to persevere in their advocacy.
While the origin of global trade has its roots deep in human history, the emergence of the Industrial Revolution more than two centuries ago here in Britain accelerated global trade to levels previously unimagined.
Britain also pioneered the development of political institutions to support free trade and more generally led the way into the modern industrial world.
While there remain many who believe civilization took a wrong turn at that time, I doubt that any of the protesters of modern capitalism would choose to live in an environment that produced a life expectancy a fraction of what most of the world now enjoys.
* * * But beyond our mutual commitment to global trade, Britain and the United States share a more enduring bond between our peoples.
This bond reflects a shared set of deep-seated values that govern the way our citizens deal with one another, and how we deal with others.
Undeniably, over the generations, the interests of Britain and the United States have at times diverged.
We had a few differences with George III, for example.
But I cannot forget the dinner President Ford gave in honor of Queen Elizabeth and Prince Phillip in celebration of the two-hundredth anniversary of our Declaration of Independence.

