I would like to thank the members of the Institute of International Bankers for the opportunity to speak about disaster recovery and business continuity.
This topic has been receiving a great deal of attention at the Federal Reserve and in the financial industry as a whole since September11.
It's fair to say that following September 11, we (bankers and supervisors alike) have a renewed appreciation of the meaning of the term "emergency preparedness."
The Federal Reserve and other regulators, both here and abroad, have been analyzing the aftermath of the terrorist attacks with a view toward strengthening the overall resilience of the financial system.
This work has benefited from discussions with leading members of the financial services industry over the past several months.
In this presentation, I want to give you a flavor of the ideas and issues under review.
Since many of you had first-hand experience of the impact of September 11, I do not intend to dwell on the details of the operational breakdowns and related challenges that faced institutions in lower Manhattan.
Suffice it to say that, through a fortuitous combination of existing plans, people, systems, and tools and an extraordinary level of cooperation among market participants, the financial system recovered remarkably quickly from the tragedy.
However, we cannot assume that the same combination will always work in our favor, and therefore, regulators and the public have a strong common interest in learning from our horrific experience of September 11.
What Did We Learn?
Let me review some of the key lessons that we believe have emerged from September 11.
First, business continuity planning at many institutions, although improved by Y2K preparations, clearly had not fully taken into account the potential for wide-spread disasters and for the major loss or inaccessibility of critical staff.
Some firms arranged for their backup facilities to be in nearby buildings for quite legitimate efficiency and convenience, and, as a result, lost both primary and backup sites.
Very few firms planned for an emergency that would disrupt multiple sites in an entire business district, city, or region.
Second, business concentrations, both market-based and geographic, intensified the impact of operational disruptions.
Besides the geographic concentration of financial institutions within New York City, some critical market functions, particularly in the clearing and settlement of funds, securities, and financial contracts, rely on only a few entities.
When even one of those entities has operational problems, many market participants feel the effects.
Moreover, significant telecommunications vulnerabilities resulting from concentrations became evident when failures affected numerous institutions, both within and outside lower Manhattan.
In fact, Federal Reserve staff were personally involved in setting priorities for the restoration of key telecommunications circuits supporting the financial services system during the week of September 11.
Third, the events of September 11 graphically demonstrated the interdependence among financial-system participants, wherever located.
Though organizations located outside the New York City area were affected much less than those within it, many felt the effects of the disaster.
The difficulty customers and counterparties had in communicating with banks, broker-dealers, and other organizations in lower Manhattan seriously impeded their ability to determine whether transactions had been completed as expected.
In some cases, some customers were affected by actions of institutions with which they did not even do business, for example, when funds or securities could not be delivered because of operational problems at other institutions.
In fact, during the week of September 11 liquidity bottlenecks at times became so severe that the Federal Reserve needed to lend substantial amounts directly to institutions through the discount window, besides providing billions more in payment system float on uncleared checks, and through open market operations.
We kept our payment systems open until nearly midnight each night that week as institutions attempted to clear out payment queues.
Heightened liquidity needs were not limited to domestic financial institutions.
The Federal Reserve set up swap lines with other major central banks to allow foreign banking organizations to obtain liquidity directly from their own authorities, to prevent U.S. liquidity imbalances from being transmitted overseas.
Most important, we learned, as a result of these interdependencies, that contingency-planning decisions made by an individual institution may affect not only the safety and soundness of that institution but also the safety and soundness of other institutions and, indeed, the very functioning of the financial markets.
As a result, we believe that coordinated discussions of sound practices for business continuity involving the financial industry and regulators are an important part of our response to the events of September 11.
Steps Financial Institutions Are Taking Let me turn to steps that institutions are taking to improve their own preparedness and business continuity planning.
September 11 may lead to changes in institutions' planning for emergencies, as well as changes in their ongoing operations.
In addition to a range of tactical steps, such as enhancing security measures, updating communication plans, and strengthening real-time data backup, institutions also are making some interesting strategic choices.
For example, many institutions use a traditional model of business continuity that is based on an "active" operating site with a corresponding backup site, often with separate sites for data processing and for business operations.
This strategy generally relies on relocating staff from the active site to the backup site and on maintaining backup copies of technology and data that are up-to-date.
In the traditional model, backup capabilities are ensured through periodic testing.
Even so, maintaining the effectiveness of backup sites, staff, and systems that are not routinely used for production is often difficult.
For example, during the week of September 11, many institutions found that disaster-recovery plans of particular business lines were not always accessible or up-to-date, and sometimes the backup and primary sites used different hardware and software versions.
Finally, the assumption that key personnel could be relocated was not always well founded.
In contrast, some institutions are now moving toward a "split operations" model, in which two or more active operating sites provide backup for one another.
Each site can absorb some or all of the work of another for an extended time.
For banking organizations with nationwide operations (particularly those that have grown through mergers), such sites are often hundreds of miles apart.
For international firms, routine workloads can be shared among sites in different countries or different continents.
This strategy can provide almost-immediate resumption capacity, depending on the systems supporting the operations and the communications and operating capacity at each site.
The strategy also addresses many of the key vulnerabilities of the traditional model.
For example, technology must be kept current at all active operating sites for normal business operations to proceed.
At the same time, the split-operations approach can have significant costs, in terms of maintaining excess capacity at each site and of adding operating complexity.
This approach may be more suited to some types of business activities, such as trading, clearing, and settlement, than to others.
Other business-continuity models may be able to provide a high degree of resilience.
Over time, technological change will significantly affect the range of business continuity strategies and, importantly, their relative costs and benefits.
Whatever operating model they chose, financial institutions clearly are reassessing the range of scenarios they need to address in their business-continuity planning.
Such scenarios posit effects on business operations over much broader geographic areas than previously imagined (such as a city or a metropolitan area) and involve consequences that could harm or significantly disperse an organization's critical employees.
Institutions are also exploring methods to provide a greater diversity of telecommunications services and to eliminate points of failure.
Contract provisions and audit oversight of telecommunications vendors may heighten attention to this critical vulnerability.
At the same time, many recognize that overcoming telecommunications vulnerabilities will be extremely difficult given the current physical infrastructure.
In the longer term, establishing diverse telecommunications methods (such as Internet and wireless) and moving toward wider geographic diversification of operations may address these vulnerabilities.
Industrywide discussions with telecommunications providers may help institutions to avoid some of the vulnerabilities exposed on September 11.
Some institutions are reexamining arrangements with disaster-recovery vendors because they have found that these vendors' "first-come, first-served" policies mean just that.
Testing of backup plans is also receiving renewed focus.
Testing is seen no longer as a compliance issue or an item on a checklist but as a critical part of business operations.
In the wake of September 11, many market participants found themselves operating from their backup sites and discovered they had problems connecting and communicating with the backup sites of other displaced entities.
As a result, financial institutions now seem receptive to coordinated testing between backup facilities.
In addition, several public and private-sector initiatives have begun to examine the issue of coordinated crisis management communication.
Overall, I believe that financial institutions are addressing many of the key vulnerabilities.
In large part, the market will demand this.
Customers increasingly require assurances that their financial institutions' operations will continue as expected even in the event of a disaster.
We need to maintain our focus on this issue even as the harsh memories of September 11 fade.
We must also find ways to make business-continuity planning more consistent, more coordinated, and more transparent across the industry.
With that in mind, I will discuss some of the steps that regulators are taking.
Steps Regulators Are Taking The Federal Reserve and other financial services regulators want these lessons to be addressed before the next disaster, whenever and whatever it may strike.
First, we are talking to our industry colleagues about appropriate sound practices.
However, I would stress that we still have a lot to learn from financial institutions and from experts in business-continuity planning.
No one knows for certain which threats (both man-made and natural) we are most likely to face in the coming years.
We have much less experience modeling and predicting these operational risks than we do credit or market risks, and indeed some threats may be too idiosyncratic to be modeled at all.
As a result, a prudential supervisory model appears preferable at this time.
Through the routine supervisory process, we are talking to institutions about the robustness of their disaster-recovery planning but are stopping short of setting detailed regulatory standards at this point.
Although I anticipate that we will issue updated supervisory guidance and examination procedures for business continuity before long, I am not certain that we want to approach this issue with a checklist.
In this process, we are working closely with other regulators, including the other federal banking regulators and the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Cities and regions outside New York City are not without risk and also need to consider reasonable threats, both man-made and natural.
I am therefore pleased that many institutions in those cities and towns, like their colleagues based in New York City are seriously considering updating and implementing business-continuity plans.
Institutions also need to define their targets for recovery from a disaster in a consistent manner.
Although in practice, expectations for recovery time may differ depending on the scenario, some critical functions, including those safeguarding and transferring funds and financial assets, are so vital to the domestic and global financial system that they arguably should continue with minimal, if any, disruption, even in the event of a major regional disaster.
Clearly, all institutions need to plan to continue serving their customers in a major disruption, and supervisory standards have required them to do so for many years.
In addition, it is increasingly clear that the operational resilience of the largest institutions in key markets needs to reflect their systemic impact across the financial sector.
Expectations should be highest for institutions whose activity can significantly affect other institutions, such as major clearing and settlement entities, and institutions that act as financial "utilities" in some of their functions.
However, we need to balance competing issues.
We have an ongoing interest in the safety and soundness of individual institutions, as well as in systemic financial stability.
But we also recognize that, even though the largest nationally and internationally active U.S. and foreign banking institutions have a key role to play in financial stability, they also participate in a competitive marketplace.
Thus, we need to be careful not to create undue burden on a handful of institutions.
Conclusion Six months after September 11, much has been planned and achieved, but we still have much to do.
We must sustain the current drive to minimize or eliminate the vulnerabilities I have discussed.
We must view September 11 as a wake-up call to improve the resilience of financial markets and institutions.
We cannot afford to ignore the lessons learned.
I ask for your cooperation in what we view as a partnership.

I wish to start by acknowledging the contributions of H. Parker Willis, a leader in teaching economics and political science and a major contributor to the establishment of the Federal Reserve.
I suspect he would be pleased to know that his contributions are remembered and that they have served national and academic interests so well.
In his teachings, Dr. Willis recognized the relationship between monetary and fiscal policy, the role of banking, and their combined effects on economic growth.
Recent events have illustrated, once again, the cyclical nature of the U.S. and world economies and the direct effect that economic conditions can have on banks as intermediaries of credit.
After nearly a decade of steady improvement, earnings from core bank operations and other measures of financial strength for the U.S. banking system have taken an inevitable turn.
While concerns about these indicators of financial health continue to grow, the deterioration is not a source of alarm.
Since the end of 1999, for example, the growth of industry assets has far outpaced the rise in earnings; nonperforming assets, though still relatively low, have expanded more than 70 percent; and the number and the assets of unsatisfactory or problem banks have increased, again still remaining relatively low.
Fraud by bank employees has led to losses and even the closure of some banks recently.
More broadly, after the failure of Enron, the stock market has reacted as we might expect to the uncertainty created by opaque balance sheets by punishing firms, both banks and nonbanks, whose risk profiles are less easily understood.
To be sure, the U.S. banking system remains strong by virtually any measure and is well positioned to support future economic growth.
By historic standards, current profitability figures are robust; and relative to the industry's equity, reserves, or asset size, nonperforming assets are still low.
Banks survive and prosper by accepting risk, which is their crucial economic role and the reason for their existence.
Nonetheless, risk must be well managed and at many institutions that task has become much more difficult and complex.
Indeed, in my remarks today, I want to discuss the changing nature of risk management in banking and its implications for bankers and bank supervisors.
My central message is that the core principles of risk management remain just that--core principles.
The improved techniques that the new technologies provide can improve matters only if they remain rooted in these core principles.
In this context, I am reminded of the old back-to-the-future theme in science fiction in which an individual travels back in time and, by his presence, nearly alters history to his or our disadvantage.
In dealing with the complex, fast-paced, and highly competitive businesses of today, many institutions may face a similar risk.
Institutions have the ability, as a result of available technology and financial innovation, to change their activities and risk profiles quickly, but they may not always employ the controls necessary to prevent unexpected and untoward results.
Many firms have already eliminated lower- and middle- management positions in response to competitive pressures.
Though such actions probably improved the cost-efficiency ratios of banks and helped them meet earnings expectations, they also could, if not done carefully, increase the likelihood that new weaknesses will appear.
That is to say, institutions must take a sufficiently long-term perspective in their decisionmaking and not pursue purely short-term remedies to high operating costs.
Banking is a highly leveraged and, in many respects, low-margin business.
Losses from a single bad loan or a material breakdown in controls can eliminate the gain on many other transactions.
The continued ability to identify and manage risks and to maintain the proper internal controls is critical in banking organizations even as they seek to increase profits and profitability.
Indeed, the acceptance and the application of the current innovations in risk-management techniques are going to require expense and some dramatic changes in the way most large banking organizations do business.
Many banks, I am afraid, are falling below the curve, perhaps on the basis of short-run cost-benefit analysis.
In my view, failure to make these outlays and changes now will put at risk these banks' long-run profitability as financial transactions grow increasingly complex.
The thrust of Basel II and, independently, our supervisory approach will disadvantage entities that do not prepare themselves by adopting these innovative techniques to handle the ever more complex financial transactions.
New technologies and techniques must be adopted if financial institutions are to avoid repeating problems and if the banking system is to be as successful in accepting risk in the future as it has been in the past.
Important Experiences Over the past thirty years, the banking industry has faced many challenges.
In the 1970s, large banks here and abroad sharply increased their exposures to the emerging economies of Latin America and other regions, as they recycled the deposits of oil-rich nations.
Although profit opportunities for the banks looked attractive for a while, the picture had clearly changed by the 1980s, and most lenders incurred sizable losses on their foreign loans as they reduced their exposures.
The industry's problems during the 1980s were more domestic in nature.
For many community banks, weak agricultural markets in the last half of the decade created difficulties throughout the Midwest and contributed to the failure of hundreds of small community banks.
By the end of the decade, excessive exposure to overbuilt commercial real estate markets had undermined the financial strength of a number of large money-center and regional banks.
Those problems forced several of these institutions to fail or otherwise to lose their independence and contributed to a wave of industry consolidation and national reforms in our domestic banking laws and regulations.
In contrast, most of the 1990s can be viewed calmly and with a certain satisfaction; indeed, the industry can be pleased about many things.
After the first few years of the past decade, the number and the cost of bank failures dropped sharply, the banking system posted an impressive performance virtually every year, and many investors and former owners of banks liquidated their holdings at nice profits as the industry consolidated.
Recently, a few banks have experienced problems of a less widespread nature than those of the 1970s and 1980s.
Last month, for example, a large foreign bank discovered trading losses in its U.S. subsidiary bank that had apparently increased substantially and gone undetected for some time.
Also last month, the FDIC seized a $70 million bank in Ohio after examiners uncovered a $40 million embezzlement.
Several years earlier, a bank in West Virginia was closed after examiners alleged bank managers hid extensive losses related to complex securitized transactions.
These experiences remind us that even a decade of solid performance does not allow anyone to become complacent.
Virtually all these major problems, whether they involved fraud or honest misjudgment of risk, can--almost by definition--be traced to weaknesses in an organization's risk-management and corporate-governance.
Judgments are always easier in hindsight, but failure to apply fundamental principles of management is often the root of material business problems.
Managing and Controlling Risk Although a few failures are the product of fraud, the key risk in banking remains credit risk--the risk that a borrower will default.
If too many customers default, so does the bank itself.
Historically, the best tools to manage credit risk included a strong reliance on understanding the business prospects of the borrower and the sources of repayment.
Additionally, to manage risk, banks have traditionally applied several limits, including limits on exposures to one counterparty and to entire industry sectors.
Recently, as I noted earlier, banks are also using more-sophisticated credit-risk-management tools.
However, credit risk is only one of the many risks that banks must manage.
Liquidity risk, traditionally defined as the risk that a bank cannot meet payment obligations in a timely and cost-effective manner, is another.
Determining what is adequate liquidity for banking organizations has always been a rather subjective and difficult task, because banks rarely have liquidity problems as long as they are viewed as sound.
Although the competition for retail deposits has emerged in the past several years, banks can still relatively easily issue additional insured deposits, given the federal government's guarantee.
Most liquidity problems arise when market confidence is lost and the bank cannot attract sufficient levels of uninsured funds.
Commercial banks, in particular, may have little room to slip, given their high leverage and slim profit margins.
A drop in market confidence can trigger a series of cascading events: a drop in the bank's credit rating, higher funding costs, reduced profitability, less overall competitiveness and access to public markets, and so forth.
All of that, in turn, increases the institution's liquidity risk.
Managing liquidity risk requires banks to address market risk, as well, by ensuring that the maturity of their assets and liabilities are reasonably balanced and that they are not overly exposed to changing interest rates, exchange rates, and equity, commodity, and bond prices.
Given the evolution of global financial markets, activities commonly associated with market risk, such as trading and investment banking, have become more important to many of our largest financial institutions.
This evolution, in turn, and the related financial innovation and widespread use of complex derivative and securitized investment products, have required virtually all banks to know more about the management of market risk.
Put somewhat differently, in the past few years, banks have initiated transactions with higher risk and used new financial engineering techniques to lay off or hedge that risk.
These beneficial and stabilizing risk-sharing techniques have the prerequisite of very strong management and control procedures.
Flaws can quickly result in significant unanticipated losses.
Operating risk, legal risk, and reputational risk round out a conventional list of risks for banks.
Operating risk, in particular, has attracted more attention in recent years, partly because improvements in technology and data storage permit institutions to retain and analyze more data and also because the increased volume and complexity of bank transactions have, arguably, increased this risk for many banks.
Roughly defined, operating risk refers to the risk arising from inadequate information systems, operational problems, breaches in internal controls, fraud, or unforeseen catastrophes that can result in unexpected losses.
The term may also embrace legal risk, because many legal claims arise from operational failures.
The need to manage and control operating risk is particularly great at institutions whose activities involve substantial interbank payments, securities settlements, asset management, or other transactions that are high volume and entail large dollar amounts.
These conditions not only expose those particular institutions to substantial risk but also have the potential to disrupt financial markets worldwide.
Events of September 11 illustrate that point.
Risk-Focused Supervision and Bank Risk Management Culture In its supervisory efforts, the Federal Reserve has for much of the past decade emphasized a risk-focused approach, particularly in the case of large institutions.
That approach requires examiners to understand an institution's risk profile and to devote resources to areas presenting the greatest risk.
It allows examiners greater flexibility in their oversight activities, focuses attention on an institution's internal processes, and contrasts with the more traditional approach that was based on reviewing and evaluating individual transactions.
The sheer volume of bank transactions today and the speed with which individual exposures can change have required us to take that approach.
We need to be confident that an institution's internal systems, procedures, and controls are sound and that they will remain effective long after our review.
Of course, evaluating procedures and controls requires some transactions testing.
Risk-focused supervision and the nature of banking today require successful organizations to maintain sound corporate governance and strong systems of controls.
Banks must manage customer and counterparty relationships with an appropriate sensitivity for risk.
Lending officers and risk managers must understand the changes in their customers' business plans that might have implications for creditworthiness.
They must not be blinded by the reputations of their counterparties but rather use all the fragmented data, both proprietary and market-based, to shed light on their customers' prospects.
Finally, exposure limits should be sufficiently robust to consider both capital at risk and cash out the door.
Still other practices, such as diversifying risks and not assuming that only the best conditions will continue indefinitely, seem to be common sense.
But even they, too, are occasionally overlooked or ignored.
Risk-based supervision requires all of us to recognize the basic nature of human beings and some of the forces that motivate us all: fear, greed, ambition, and the like.
All of this, in turn, speaks to the importance of implementing the management principles we learned in college or as management trainees: the importance of segregating certain duties; limiting an individual's span of control; establishing written policies and procedures; and providing accurate and timely information to an organization's senior management and directors and to its creditors and shareholders, as well.
The fact that managers can delegate authority--but not responsibility--is another.
Neither bank supervisors nor internal or external auditors can detect or deter all weak practices, particularly when core management principles are not applied.
Fraudulent activities are particularly difficult to uncover because they often involve collusion and individuals with authority within the organization.
It is crucial, then, that institutions maintain a culture that values integrity and creates adequate controls.
That effort must begin at the top.
Bank Capital Standards In an effort to provide large internationally active banks with greater incentives to measure and manage risk well, bank supervisors around the world are developing more-sophisticated and more-risk-sensitive regulatory capital standards, techniques and standards.
These grew out of what best-practice banks have talked about doing and some have begun to apply.
If this multi-year effort is successful (a goal the Federal Reserve Board hopes for and is trying hard to achieve), it would replace a decade-old capital standard with one that is better able to distinguish among banks based on the economic risks associated with their activities.
In addition to other benefits, this should provide more information for both supervisors and market participants to use in evaluating the condition of the largest and most complex banking organizations.
The standard under development will in large part be based on the internal credit ratings that banks assign to their exposures and on other internal measures of risk.
It requires institutions to evaluate a borrower's probability of default, the bank's loss given a customer's default, and the bank's likely exposure to the borrower at the time the default occurs.
Relevant factors such as the collateral for, and maturity of, the credit and any undrawn loan commitments are to be considered.
Leading banking organizations throughout the world are making some progress in measuring credit and other risks, and consulting firms and other private-sector businesses are providing helpful analysis, insights, and techniques.
I do not want to downplay the contributions of bank risk managers to the development of these newer concepts and techniques.
But the fact is that much of this gain could be attributed, I believe, to the willingness of regulators to revisit capital standards and also to the increased attention they have given to risk measurement during their on-site supervisory reviews.
Even further progress will be made as industry analysts, investors, and counterparties ask informed questions about an institution's risk profile and refuse to settle for responses that such questions are inappropriate or that answers are too difficult to provide.
Such replies should encourage analysts to dig deeper, as they should for bank supervisors, too.
Only by probing for further answers when disclosures are unclear can we expect more meaningful and complete information.
Unfortunately, measuring credit risk is not easy, nor will applying the new techniques be cheap, especially for those institutions that need it the most--the large internationally active banks with their complex structures and operations.
If it were easy, the methods would be clear and well accepted by now.
If measuring credit risk with these new techniques were cheap, more banks would be applying them.
It is, as I said, neither easy nor cheap.
These facts are complicating the international process for developing more-risk-sensitive capital standards and reaching an agreement that addresses relevant industry concerns.
They are also making the process more time-consuming.
In some areas, the regulators are finding themselves developing solutions and filling holes for which the industry itself has no widely accepted practice.
Measuring risk in commercial real estate lending, bank equity investing, and even the effect of a loan's maturity on its underlying risk are some of the issues still actively under debate among supervisors and bank managers.
Banking practices and the role of banks generally in the credit-intermediation process also differ among countries and continents, given the different borrowing practices of consumers, the various stages of development of capital markets throughout the world, and the very different legal codes and regulatory philosophies.
In the absence of established solutions within the industry across the major industrial economies, regulators are forced to make proposals based largely on concepts and partial applications rather than on a practice common to all industrial economies.
Any regulatory capital standard must, of course, require banks to hold an amount of capital sufficient to get them through, not the worst imaginable, but nevertheless rough times.
Competition within the industry and among banking systems of different countries often presses for less.
Such pressures must be resisted, as supervisors throughout the world work together to develop a more accurate standard that is sufficiently rigorous and that accomplishes our common goals.
We want a capital structure that is risk sensitive; until we have more experience with the new approach, however, prudence argues against a wholesale reduction in aggregate capital levels.
Some institutions' capital requirements may fall as the requirements for other institutions rise, in both cases because of their portfolio risks.
An important objective is to spur, not discourage, more analysis and understanding of banking risks, including those areas that have historically not been subject to much quantification, such as operational risk.
Requiring banks to quantify their risk assessments should push in that direction.
The need for more progress within the industry on that front seems clear.
Urging better and more complete public disclosure of risk seems equally beneficial to the risk measurement, credit allocation, and investment processes.
All of these efforts should proceed.
For better or worse, there will be a lag before new rules can be developed, agreed upon, and implemented through our various rulemaking processes.
The industry will also need time to develop the information and risk-measurement systems that would be required.
In the meantime, the regulatory and banking communities will continue to learn from developments in the practice of measuring risk, and supervisory expectations will evolve.
Much work remains in developing a new standard that is sufficiently acceptable to the Federal Reserve and to other parties.
The effort presents an opportunity, however, to move industry and regulatory practices further ahead.
We are eager to work with other regulators to achieve that purpose.
Conclusion In closing, I emphasize, again, the importance of teaching, learning and applying the fundamental principles of economics and sound management practices, as you are doing here at Washington and Lee.
Many of our financial institutions today have become extremely large and complex, in both their operations and their management processes.
Fundamental principles still apply, however, and we cannot afford to overlook them.
At the same time, new technologies and concepts offer an opportunity to add to these principles a set of techniques that could well change the way banks manage risk.

