I would like to thank Barbara Walter, the manager of the Federal Reserve Branch in Buffalo, for inviting me to speak to this group of local business owners today.
I am pleased to be here in my hometown to discuss the importance of small businesses to both the local and national economies.
Small businesses--which I will define as firms with less than 500 employees--are an integral part of the U.S. economy.
By some estimates, there are more than twenty-five million small businesses in the United States, accounting for more than 99 percent of all firms.
Small businesses employ more than half the workforce in the private sector, generate about three-fourths of net new jobs each year, and produce more than one half of the private sector's output.
Because of the vital role that small businesses play in our economy, the Federal Reserve is keenly interested in understanding the dynamics of small business development and financing and undertakes various initiatives to achieve this objective.
The Federal Reserve also actively supports programs that encourage community development in low- and moderate-income areas and that promote small business development.
Through our Community Affairs programs at each of the twelve Reserve Banks, we conduct ongoing outreach and educational activities and provide technical assistance to help financial institutions, their customers, and communities understand and address community credit needs.
Our recent activities have focused increasingly on issues related to small business and economic development.
In the interest of improving access to funding resources and information in upstate New York, the Federal Reserve's Community Affairs Office in Buffalo provides technical assistance, sponsors conferences, conducts outreach, and produces publications to support small business development.
In 2001, it hosted a major regional conference on attracting businesses to inner city markets.
Earlier this year, the Community Affairs Office co-hosted a seminar with the National Association of Women Business Owners, the Small Business Administration, and other local partners focusing on the fundamentals of starting and growing a small business.
A direct result of this workshop was the development of a publication detailing capital and educational services available in the greater Buffalo-Rochester area.
This directory, which is available on the Internet, provides ready access to a large number of funding and technical assistance resources designed specifically for small businesses.
In addition, staff members of the Community Affairs Office serve on the board of the Office of Urban Initiatives, a local community economic development organization that assists minority- and women-owned businesses.
Given the importance of small businesses to our economy, and their need for credit to facilitate growth, the Federal Reserve has taken a leading role in efforts to better understand the factors that influence the availability of funds to support small business activity.
Every five years, the Board of Governors submits a report to the Congress detailing the extent of small business lending by all creditors.
Our most recent report to the Congress, submitted this past September, provides an extensive review of developments in recent years.
An important input into this analysis is the Board's Survey of Small Business Finances, which is conducted every five years; the most recent was in 1998.
This survey provides the most comprehensive and up-to-date information available on small business finance available.1 The survey shows that among small businesses, larger firms were more likely than smaller firms to use each of the traditional types of credit: credit lines, capital leases, motor vehicle loans, mortgages, equipment loans, and other loans.
In addition, small businesses obtain credit from a wide range of sources.
Commercial banks are the leading source; they supply 65 percent of the total dollar volume of small business loans outstanding.
In contrast, other financial institutions, such as finance companies, supplied about a quarter of outstanding loans.
Nonfinancial sources, including government and individuals, supplied less than 10 percent.
Over the latter 1990s, business financing flows to both large and small borrowers were strong; but in 2001 and early 2002, the flows moderated along with economic growth.
Debt growth appears to have held up better at small firms than at large firms, and small businesses have not reported material difficulties in obtaining credit during the downturn.
Indeed, despite a tightening of financial conditions in 2001 and the first three quarters of 2002 and widening credit spreads on commercial and industrial loans in recent months, there is little evidence that creditworthy borrowers of any size faced substantial constraints in credit supply.
Concerns about small business financing have stemmed largely from perceptions that small firms have more difficulty gaining access to credit sources than do large businesses or other types of borrowers.
The source of this difficulty may be that lending to small business is generally considered riskier and more costly than lending to larger firms.
Small businesses are much more susceptible to swings in the economy and have a much higher rate of failure than larger operations.
In addition, lenders historically have had difficulty determining the creditworthiness of applicants for some small business loans.
The wide variation in the characteristics of small firms has impeded the development of general standards for assessing applications for small business loans and has made evaluating such loans less straightforward and relatively expensive.
Concerns about small business financing for minority and women-owned businesses have arisen because of the persistent differences observed in financing patterns by these groups, as well as their underrepresentation in the business population.
Minority-owned firms constitute only a small proportion of all small businesses.
As of 1998, we estimate that about 15 percent of all small businesses were minority-owned: about 4 percent each were black-owned and Asian-owned, and 6 percent were Hispanic-owned.
Only about a quarter of small businesses in the United States are owned by women.
On a more positive note, data from the Census Bureau indicate that in recent years the number of minority-owned firms and women-owned firms has been increasing faster than the number of U.S. businesses overall.
The increases in small business ownership and equity investment by traditionally underrepresented populations may have resulted from greater access to appropriate financing to fund the start-up and growth of businesses.
Still, we must continue to seek ways to promote the creation and expansion of viable firms by lowering barriers to funding and financial services and by ensuring that potential small business owners have the needed management skills to support their businesses.
The opportunity to start an enterprise must be open to anyone with a viable business concept.
Research based on the Board's survey data has provided many insights on similarities and differences in the characteristics of male-owned and female-owned firms and of white-owned and minority-owned firms.
For example, female-owned firms are smaller, younger, more likely to engage in retail sales and services, and more likely to be organized as proprietorships than were male-owned firms.
Firms owned by blacks tend to be smaller (whether measured by assets, sales, or employment), newer, and more likely to be located in an urban area than their nonminority counterparts.
Black-owned businesses also tend to be owned by younger individuals with fewer years of experience and poorer credit histories.
Finally, black-owned businesses are more likely to be sole proprietorships and in the services industry.
Differences between other minority-owned firms and white-owned firms have also been identified, but they tend to be less pronounced.
Research has also shown that many women- and minority-owned firms differ from male- and white-owned firms in some of their credit market experiences.
Female-owned firms are less likely to have outstanding loans, less likely to use business credit cards and trade credit, less likely to borrow using trade credit, and more likely to borrow with credit cards than were male-owned firms.2 Female-owned firms are also less likely than male-owned firms to have applied for new credit.
But for the firms that applied, the research showed no significant differences between female- and male-owned firms in approval rates or loan terms.
In fact, virtually all the observed differences in credit use by female- and male-owned businesses appear to be related to factors other than owner sex; they include such characteristics as firm size, age, and industry.
The same cannot be said for racial differences in credit experiences.
The case of African Americans showed the most striking differences, so I'll focus on this group.
The studies indicated that black-owned firms are less likely to have outstanding loans, less likely to use business credit cards, less likely to borrow using trade credit, and more likely to borrow with credit cards than were white-owned firms.
Black-owned firms are just as likely as white-owned firms to apply for new credit, but they are significantly less likely to have their loan application approved.
In addition, African Americans are more likely not to apply for a business loan when they need credit because they fear their loan application would be denied.
In general, studies have concluded that black-owned firms are more likely to be turned down for credit, even after controlling for differences that might affect their application, such as credit history.
However, when examined more closely, the general pattern has been found to mask more complex relationships.
For example, differences in denial rates are less pronounced in urban markets, which account for a vast majority of firms in the study, than in rural areas.
And when small retail firms are considered separately, denial rates for black-owned firms and for white-owned firms are similar.
Clearly, additional research is needed to fully understand these complexities.
Whether discrimination helps to explain the various credit market experiences of small businesses owned by individuals from different demographic groups--and, if it does, to what extent--is difficult to determine.
Many factors are considered in evaluating risk, and legitimate economic factors properly play a central role in credit decisions.
These data alone cannot identify discrimination because they do not include all the unique factors involved in each credit-granting decision.
This having been said, discrimination in any creditor's decision is disturbing.
To the extent that market participants discriminate--consciously or unconsciously--capital does not flow to its most profitable uses.
In the end, costs are higher, less real output is produced, and national wealth accumulation is slowed.
By removing the non-economic distortions that arise as a result of discrimination, we can generate higher returns to human capital and other productive resources.
At its heart, discrimination in granting credit artificially restricts the flow of capital.
It means that viable economic activity goes unfunded.
The Federal Reserve is committed to enforcing our nation's laws against illegal discrimination in credit decisions.
We continue to examine banks to measure and ensure their compliance with the Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
And we will continue to sponsor research on credit availability and constraint, including potential illegal discrimination.
Moreover, we seek to facilitate the establishment of relationships between the financial services sector and the rapidly growing number of minority- and women-owned businesses.
I conclude by emphasizing the importance of small businesses to the Federal Reserve.
Small businesses are critical to the strength and vigor of the U.S. economy.
We continue in our efforts to understand credit markets and to address issues of credit and capital availability confronting small businesses, including those owned by women and minorities.
Through effective monetary policy, we work toward our goal of helping to maintain price stability and to create conditions for sustainable economic growth, which will provide continued opportunities for all small businesses to flourish.
It has been a pleasure to be here with you this morning.
Thank you for your kind attention.
Footnotes 1.
The 1998 SSBF gathered data for fiscal year 1998 from 3,561 firms selected to be representative of small businesses operating in the United States in December 1998.
The survey gathered details on the characteristics of each business and its primary owner, the firm's income statement and balance sheet, and details of the use and sources of financial services.
It also obtained information about the firm's recent borrowing and credit application experience, the use of trade credit, and capital infusions.

My remarks today will address, from my perspective as a policymaker, a former banker, and a former adviser to the Congress, some of the issues that were raised in this morning's session and that will be discussed in this afternoon's presentations.
Specifically, I would like to comment on some of the potential implications of the U.S. banking sector's changing structure for competition in the context of the Board's supervision and antitrust responsibilities.
I will also discuss the deposit insurance system, which is administered through the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) and the allocation of credit, with a focus on loans to small businesses.
As everyone here is fully aware, changes in market structure can have profound effects in each of these areas.
By changes in market structure, I will refer primarily to changes in the number, size, charter, and other characteristics of firms on the supply side of banking and nonbanking markets brought about by the ongoing consolidation of the banking and financial services industry.
However, the demand side of markets is also clearly relevant, and when necessary, I will include demand characteristics in my discussion.
The issues to which I refer are not new nor unique to the United States but, rather, have existed for many years and transcend national boundaries.
In fact, the consolidation of banks and other types of financial institutions is one of the most notable features of the international financial landscape over the past decade or more.
In recognition of the importance of financial consolidation, its potential impact on market structure, and its potential implications for public policy concerns, the Finance Ministers and central bank governors of the G-10 nations in late 1999 asked their deputies to study financial consolidation and its potential effects.
My colleague, Roger Ferguson, directed this study, which was published in early 2001.
Today, I would like to use some of the findings of the study as my starting point for addressing the issues I mentioned a few moments ago.
Because the study was international in scope it will allow me to put some of my comments on the United States into a global context.
Competition In the United States and many other countries, a common concern is the potential for banking and financial consolidation to change the structure of banking markets in ways that reduce competition and thus harm consumers.
The fact that the Federal Reserve has significant responsibility for enforcing antitrust laws in banking ensures that this issue has received considerable attention at the Fed.
Consolidation in the U.S. banking industry has occurred on a massive scale.
In 1934, the year federal deposit insurance was implemented in the United States, the total number of bank charters was greater than 14,000.
A similar number of chartered institutions were still functioning when the consolidation wave began in 1986.
Today the number is just less than 8,000, a reduction of 43 percent.
That consolidation, however, has not caused a diminution of competition for consumers or small businesses.
For many reasons, including the rise of nonbank providers for many bank and bank-like services and the increased use of electronic banking, consolidation in the United States has generally been accompanied by heightened competition.
Still, in my view, ignoring the significance of market structure and its implications for competition would be a mistake.
This was certainly the conclusion of the G-10 study.
For example, the study found that, in the United States and the other nations included in the study, the markets for a number of key bank products--such as retail deposits and small business loans--appeared to be primarily local.
Local, in this context was defined as a market that can be approximated geographically by such concepts as metropolitan areas and rural counties in the United States, and provinces and cantons in some other nations.
On the demand side, studies in the United States indicate that both households and small businesses procure key components of their banking services overwhelmingly from suppliers located within a few miles of themselves.
It is still not common for these consumers to deal with institutions that can be reached only by telephone or the Internet.
On the supply side, the number of banking offices in most developed countries, including the United States, continues to increase, despite a consolidation process that has reduced the number of independent banking organizations.
In the United States, for example, although the number of bank charters has declined 43 percent over the past fifteen years, the number of bank branches has increased 47 percent (from 44,392 to more than 65,600).
This increase suggests that firms continue to feel the need for a local presence to compete for the business of customers.
Of course, banks have many products for which the markets are not local in the way that I have defined the term.
For example, markets for products such as large corporate loans, bond and equity underwriting, and credit cards are generally national or international in scope.
Even products such as mortgages for single-family homes, which tend to be originated locally in the United States, are funded, serviced, and traded as securitized assets in national markets.
But the evidence continues to indicate that the structure of a properly defined market, regardless of whether its geographic scope is local, national, or international, makes a difference.
Studies in the United States, Italy, and Switzerland find that substantial increases in market concentration have the potential to cause a reduction in deposit interest rates or an increase in loan interest rates.
In both research and policy analysis in the United States, the supply structure of banking markets has been measured by the shares of, say, the top three or five firms, and an indicator of overall structure, using a measure of concentration known as the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index.
At the antitrust policy level, in the United States we use screens based on such measures to determine if a proposed merger has the potential to adversely affect consumers.
There are indications, however, that our banking system's ongoing evolution may be making these traditional measures less reliable as indicators of the degree of competition in a given market.
I would like to report the results of some interesting research that the Board staff has been doing in this area.
In three recent studies, members of the Board staff have analyzed the possible effects of aspects of market structure not considered in more traditional research.
These studies strongly reinforce the importance of local markets for antitrust analysis of certain financial products, especially retail deposits and small business loans.1 But they also suggest that the current focus of U.S. antitrust analysis on the traditional measures of local market concentration that I mentioned earlier, to the exclusion of other structural measures, is perhaps becoming less appropriate.
Specifically, the relative market presence of banks that operate in multiple markets and the market share of large banks may also be significant.
Supervision and Administration of the Safety Net A critical issue addressed by the G-10 study was whether ongoing changes in banking system structure in the studied nations were affecting the risk of individual institutions or, more important, the level of systemic risk in the overall banking industry.
The study concluded that, for both types of risk, the effects of changes in market structure were unclear.
With regard to the risk of an individual institution, the study came to the intuitively appealing conclusion that the evaluation of individual firm risk must be done case by case no matter what the market structure.
The one area in which consolidation seems likely to reduce single institution risk is diversification gains, although even here the possible outcomes are complex.
For example, diversification gains seem likely to occur from consolidation across regions of a given nation and from combinations across national borders.
In the United States, there is some evidence that diversification gains have generally resulted from the expansion of interstate banking.
Bankers in the United States well remember the mid-1980s, when our nation was hit with systemic weaknesses in both the agriculture and the energy segments of the economy.
Throughout the Plains states and extending to the Southwest, these sector weaknesses led to significant bank failures.
It is not a coincidence that many states affected by these bank failures responded by dropping their prohibition on interstate bank ownership and prospectively allowing for greater diversification of these banks.
Consolidation of banks in the United States has not been uniformly consistent with management or shareholder expectations, however.
The strategic justification for mergers typically takes one of two forms--either to consolidate presence in an existing market or to enter a new market.
Consolidation within an existing market is typically expected to achieve greater efficiency through significant consolidation of operations.
Mergers to enter new markets provide fewer opportunities to achieve these efficiencies.
Not uncommonly, a consolidated bank, particularly when entering a new market, does not achieve the cost saving or efficiency gains initially expected.
As a result, some mergers actually increase operational or reputational risk of the consolidated institution.
In part because the net effect of consolidation on the risk of an individual firm must be assessed case by case, the net effect of consolidation on systemic risk is also uncertain.
The G-10 study, however, concluded that, if a large and complex banking organization becomes impaired, then consolidation and any attendant organizational complexity may increase the probability that the workout, or wind-down, of such an organization would be difficult and could be disorderly.
Because such firms are the ones most likely to be associated with systemic risk, this aspect of consolidation has probably increased the chances that a wind-down could have broad economic implications.
These conclusions regarding individual firm and systemic risk reinforce the need for central banks and other financial regulators to prudently administer the safety net extended to depository institutions--a central topic of this conference.
The precise meaning of prudence is complex, and it includes interrelated concerns such as the need to intervene promptly in failing institutions, the necessity of carefully administering the lender of last resort function, the willingness to let insolvent institutions die, the insistence on the maintenance of adequate capital, the need for supervision that focuses hard on risk measurement and management, and the encouraging of market discipline through putting stockholders, managers, and uninsured creditors truly at risk.
One aspect of such prudence in the United States concerns the administration of the deposit insurance system.
Of the sixty-eight deposit insurance systems evaluated by the International Monetary Fund in a 1999 worldwide study, the U.S. system is the oldest.
Created in 1933, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) began insuring deposits for approved banks in January 1934.
In its original form, the FDIC was a model of clarity regarding its mission and function.
Its mission was to insure the deposits of small-dollar savers up to $2,500.
Its function was essentially to be a paying agent for insured depositors in the event of a bank failure.
At that time, it was only an insurer, it had no supervisory or regulatory authority.
The original construct lasted only one year.
The following year, the Congress amended the charter to give the FDIC supervisory authority and doubled the amount of coverage to $5,000.
For the next forty-five years, the changes in deposit insurance were subtle.
But these subtle changes had significant public policy implications.
Insurance coverage was increased in several stages, but it remained relatively stable in constant dollar terms until 1980.
Of greater long-term significance was the FDIC's practice of resolving bank failures of that era by arranging mergers of failed banks; by doing so it instituted a de facto policy of effectively insuring 100 percent of all deposits.
This practice did not receive careful scrutiny during the period, and the public policy implications of 100 percent coverage remained unnoticed.
The public policy implications finally received attention after the failure of the Continental Illinois Bank in 1984 and the subsequent decision to hold all depositors harmless.
In the volatile 1980s, the public policy issues implicit in that policy--"moral hazard," "too big to fail," and expansion of the "safety net"--became unavoidable and needed to be addressed.
Through a series of legislative initiatives, from 1989 to 1999 the Congress addressed, in varying degrees, each of the issues.
Not only the banking industry and the FDIC insurance fund faced public policy issues in that decade.
The savings and loan industry and its insurer, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC), were under even more severe pressure.
With a loan portfolio consisting largely of fixed-rate mortgages, the thrift industry came under extraordinary duration-risk pressures in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when inflation drove deposit rates into a double-digit range and maturities on deposit instruments dropped from more than four years to less than one year on new savings deposits.
The thrift regulators responded by allowing and, at times, encouraging mergers, many with little or no tangible capital.
As a result, when real estate loans went sour a few years later, the savings and loan industry did not have the capital strength to withstand the strain.
Eventually, the Congress was compelled to step in and recapitalize the underfunded FSLIC fund and, at the same time, move its administration to the FDIC.
Current FDIC Chairman Donald Powell, like his predecessor, has offered a number of proposals to reform the current FDIC law.
The extent to which the FDIC is in need of fundamental updating can best be described through the following examples.
A well-managed, well-capitalized bank with $1 billion in deposits can have its annual premium for deposit insurance range from a low of zero to a high of $2.3 million, entirely on the basis of the overall level of the FDIC fund.
In other words, that range bears no relationship to the risk profile of the individual institution.
As a second example, a newly chartered insured institution--say, a bank affiliate of a securities firm--could grow very rapidly by aggressively marketing insured deposit products and, because of the accumulated premiums of long-time institutions, could enjoy a free ride by paying no deposit insurance premiums in times when the insurance fund is above its mandated threshold of 1.25 percent of total insured deposits.
Yet several fast-growing, free-riding institutions could trigger premium increases for the entire industry by altering the ratio of the fund's level to total industry deposits.
Adding to the need to address fundamental change to the FDIC statute is the arbitrary nature of the 1.25 percent designated reserve ratio, the maintenance of which can trigger wide premium swings.
The ratio was the product of political expediency when written into the law a decade ago and has now assumed relevance far exceeding its value.
All in all, the current deposit insurance system has a number of aspects that one would never observe in the private sector and that need to be reformed.
Indeed, most parties to the deposit insurance issue agree on the need to provide the FDIC with greater flexibility in setting premiums, to eliminate the free-rider provision, and to encourage increased risk-based assessment of premiums.
The Federal Reserve Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System endorsed these proposed changes.
My final observations on deposit insurance reform concern the most controversial part of the current debate in the United States: whether to raise the deposit insurance limit.
As many of you know, my fellow Board members and I oppose an increase in, or an indexing of, the current $100,000 deposit insurance ceiling.
In our judgment, increased coverage would be unlikely to add in any measurable way to the stability of the banking system.
Macroeconomic policy and other elements of the federal safety net for depository institutions, including the still-significant level of deposit insurance, continue to be effective deterrents against bank runs.
Moreover, that household depositors would benefit from an increase in coverage is not apparent.
According to our periodic surveys of consumer finances, most U.S. household depositors have balances well below the current insurance limit, and those who have larger balances appear to have been adept at achieving the level of deposit insurance coverage they desire by opening multiple accounts.
Such spreading of asset holdings is perfectly consistent with the counsel always given to investors to diversify their assets--be they stocks, bonds, mutual funds, or certificates of deposit--across different issuers.
Some small banks argue that they need increased deposit insurance coverage to compete effectively with their larger and more diversified cousins.
An analysis of small bank performance does not support that claim.
For example, since the mid-1990s, smaller banks' assets and uninsured deposits, adjusted for the effects of mergers, have expanded at twice the pace of those at the largest banks.
Throughout the 1990s, small banks' return on equity was well maintained, and the viability of small banks is evidenced further by the fact that more than 1,350 new banks were chartered over the past decade in the United States, virtually all of them small institutions.
With few, if any, benefits, raising the ceiling would risk incurring substantial net costs by expanding the safety net, increasing the government subsidy to banking, encouraging moral hazard, and reducing the incentive for market discipline.
Supply of Credit to Small Business I now turn to my final topic for today--possible implications of the changing structure of the U.S. banking sector for the supply of credit to small businesses.
In the United States and many other countries, consolidation in the banking industry has involved large numbers of small banks.
As a net result of mergers, failures, and new entry, the number of commercial banks in the United States with total assets under $100 million (in 1994 dollars) fell from a little more than 8,800 in 1990 to not quite 4,800 at the end of 2001.
Although, as I have indicated, these small banks have generally been doing quite well, some observers have expressed concern that such changes in the structure of the banking industry may adversely affect the availability of credit to small businesses.
Given the importance of small businesses to all of our economies, the supply of credit to such firms deserves serious attention.
For this reason, the effect of consolidation on small business lending was a focus of the G-10 study.
It has continued to be a topic of research by Board staff, and I am pleased to see that it is the subject of papers presented at this conference.
Concern about the effects of consolidation on the supply of credit to small businesses is predicated on the view that the larger banks resulting from consolidation may restructure their portfolios by discontinuing credit relationships with smaller borrowers and expanding lending to larger borrowers.
To the extent that the credit relationship between a bank and a small business is characterized by a relatively high level of specialized knowledge by the bank about its customer, small firms could face difficulties in finding credit from other sources.
Early statistical studies of the effect of bank consolidation on small business lending provided some support to the concerns I have just summarized, as early studies suggested that banks reduce the percentage of their portfolio invested in small businesses after consolidation.
However, subsequent research has allayed some of these fears, at least in the United States.
Importantly, more recent research has recognized that what is relevant is what effect of changes in market structure have on the total availability of credit to small borrowers and whether such changes are associated with more accurate pricing of risk.
In the United States, studies that have examined the effect of mergers and acquisitions on small business lending by other banks in the same local markets have found that other banks and new bank entrants tend to offset any reduction in the supply of credit to small businesses by the consolidating banks.
In addition, a recent study by Board staff and others suggests that earlier conclusions regarding the behavior of larger banks may need some qualification.2 This study finds that the creation of large banks may not significantly reduce lending to small businesses.
Evidence is beginning to emerge that technological change, such as the use of credit-scoring models for small business loans, may serve to expand the supply of credit to small businesses.3 In any event, the remaining uncertainties suggest to me that this topic will be a fertile one for all of us in the coming years.
Conclusion I would like to close my remarks by returning to where I began.
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this conference, and once again I thank our hosts for their invitation to me and for their generous hospitality.
The topics we are discussing are important, and I hope that I have contributed to our understanding of some of the relevant issues.
Thank you.
Footnotes 1.
Berger, Allen N., Richard J. Rosen, and Gregory F. Udell, "The Effect of Market Size Structure on Competition: The Case of Small Business Lending," FEDS Working Paper 2001-63, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2001; Hannan, Timothy H., and Robin A. Prager, "The Competitive Implications of Multi-market Bank Branching," FEDS Working Paper 2001-43, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2001; and Heitfield, Erik, and Robin A. Prager, "The Geographic Scope of Retail Deposit Markets," FEDS Working Paper 2002-49, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2002.
Return to text 2.

