Roughly a decade ago, my wife and I were privileged to be your guests, at another convention, and I am delighted to be with you again.
In analyzing the banking industry, I will start with 1991, for three reasons.
First, starting with that year gives me a decade of data for analysis.
Second, 1991 was the final year of the last cycle of major credit weakness.
Third, in that year the Congress passed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act (FDICIA), which imposed explicit capital standards and mandated specific regulatory actions for banks deemed to be less than well capitalized.
To begin, the condition of the banking industry, including the Maryland banks, is sound.
Capital, earnings, and asset quality have improved for banks of all sizes from the smallest segment (less than $50 million) to the largest (more than $10 billion).
As much as banking has changed in the last decade, any analysis of the industry suggests that banks of all sizes can continue to prosper.
The continued flow of new applications and approvals for bank charters supports this fundamental conclusion.
From January 1, 2000, through the end of the first quarter of 2002, 385 new bank charters were approved in the United States.
Of that number, 375 were de novos.
The remaining ten were thrift conversions.
However, the differences in how the financial conditions of the various size categories of banks have changed since 1991 are striking.
The changes in equity capital positions may be the most noteworthy example.
Ten years ago, the equity-to-asset ratios of the smallest banks were, on average, 66 percent higher than those of the largest banks.
Since then, the capital ratios of banks of all sizes have improved, but today, doubtlessly inspired by FDICIA's provisions for prompt corrective action, the largest banks have significantly increased their capital ratios, and the smallest banks are only 30 percent higher.
Over the ten years, most banks experienced some diminution of interest-rate margin, but the most notable change has been with the very largest and the very smallest banks.
The banks in between have had quite consistent net interest margins for the period.
Efforts to improve earnings on equity have also been quite different according to bank size.
The largest banks have most aggressively worked to improve their efficiency ratios and expand their sources of non-interest revenue.
Not surprisingly, these banks have experienced the most improvement in their returns on equity.
The changes in return on assets among various size categories offer a somewhat different twist.
All else being equal, increases in capital will result in improved return-on-assets ratios.
Indeed, the banks with the most significant increases in capital are also the banks that realized the largest improvement in return on assets.
Despite the consolidation in the banking industry, more than 8,000 separate banks remain, and for every three bank charters that have disappeared through consolidation, one new de novo charter has been approved.
This history of multiple charters and great numbers of banks is unique to the United States among the developed nations of the world and is an important part of our financial heritage.
Current Regulatory Issues Though our approach to supervision needs to accommodate banks of differing size, complexity, and strategic direction, most banks face similar regulatory and supervisory issues.
We have just concluded more than ten years of economic prosperity, followed by slightly more than one year of recession--a recession that is now behind us.
At this point in the economic cycle, whatever weaknesses have crept into our risk- management systems are most likely to come to light.
Because of the decade of prosperity, many of our loan officers have not experienced an economic downturn.
Our credit-scoring models are based on credit histories that reflect only prosperity.
Commercial business and real estate loans that were approved during the period of economic expansion may now be affected by changed circumstances.
All of these factors provoke concerns about credit quality.
Indeed, we are noticing some deterioration of asset quality among banks of all sizes.
Nonaccrual and nonperforming loans increased steadily every quarter last year.
This deterioration deserves attention, but it is not expected to reach the dimension of the asset-quality issues of the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Better credit-administration procedures and a significantly milder recession are key reasons for stronger asset quality today than that of a dozen years ago.
Changes in bank activities over the past decade, however, have created new risk- management issues.
Increased use of off-balance-sheet activities has allowed banks to reduce risk exposures, and for that reason these sophisticated activities constitute important improvements to risk management.
But they can also involve complex transactions that may require expanded risk-management capabilities.
They also require tight controls and careful attention to the accounting issues to ensure that their income-recognition and risk- transfer intent is reflected in the institutions' financial reporting.
Though the Federal Reserve has not noticed widespread abuse in this area, we have uncovered instances in which the financial reporting has not reflected the substance of the transaction, and we have asked that it be corrected.
As in the past, we continue to ask banks to focus on the quality of their internal controls.
This issue is of particular concern when the scope of a banking activity has outstripped the controls for monitoring that particular risk exposure.
In the past decade, banks of all sizes have been able, largely because of technological advances, to obtain easier access to secondary markets and change their risk profiles by using newly developed financial instruments.
These new opportunities, however, exert new pressures on internal controls.
They require that institutions maintain the professional expertise necessary both to manage the risk exposures inherent in the new activities and to implement the requisite controls to adequately limit the new risk exposures.
In the past few years we have seen less-familiar risks assume new prominence.
Banking is more than managing credit and market risk.
As recent highly publicized experiences have demonstrated, managing operational and legal risk and maintaining an institution's integrity are critical issues.
In the case of Enron, a loss of market confidence in its financial reporting led to a loss of counterparty and investor confidence, which very quickly led to insurmountable liquidity problems, and the company collapsed.
A Look to the Future I last spoke to the Maryland Bankers Association about a decade ago.
The title of my presentation was "Banking in the Nineties."
In that talk, I attempted to look into the future and suggest what management issues awaited the industry.
I included a caveat that I believed that no one could have predicted the changes of the previous ten years and that a look into the future would therefore need to be very general.
Though I offer the same caveat today, I would like to suggest several issues that I believe will be important to bank management and therefore to your industry's regulators in the years ahead.
First, a brief look at the past ten years.
In the past decade, virtually all the barriers to interstate ownership and interstate branching have disappeared.
The Glass-Steagall Act, which for more than fifty years separated the banking and securities industries, has been significantly dismantled.
It is important to note that the most significant changes occurred in the marketplace and that the passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act in 1999 largely changed federal banking statute to comport with what had already occurred in the marketplace.
Also, as expected, advances in technology led to more efficient operations and to improved product delivery both at retail branch offices and through online banking.
Technological change has also allowed the growth of nonbank competitors, many of which operate in a significantly less-regulated environment.
As a thirty-five-year veteran of the banking industry, I believe that bank consolidation still represents the greatest change.
It is still not intuitive to me that Bank of America is headquartered in North Carolina rather than California, that Bank One is in Chicago and not Columbus, or that when we mention JPMorgan Chase we are talking about a single institution.
That my mother-in-law in Pelican Rapids, Minnesota, now banks locally with Wells Fargo Bank, which for most of its history had been a quintessential California institution, is even more of an eye opener.
When reviewing changes of this magnitude we may tend to assume that the pace of change may now slow.
I suspect that quite the opposite is true.
The forces that drove many of the changes of the past decade seem likely to drive change in the future--and perhaps at an accelerated rate.
The major driver of future change will undoubtedly continue to be technological changes.
With all the changes in technology to this point, experts tell us we are nowhere near the limits of technological improvement.
As new options become available, decisions regarding the use of technology may be the most critical decision that bank management will make.
That banks first identify a business strategy and then make technology decisions to support that strategy has become increasingly critical.
The range of choices is not limited to large institutions.
Even the smallest institutions can offer real-time online account access to their customers and can have access to data on customer profitability, which allows them to better develop and price their products.
Greater technological sophistication has two other important ramifications for banks.
First, it allows your nonbank competitors to improve both the speed to market and the quality of their financial products.
Second, it continues to concern customers who more and more ask for assurances about the privacy of their financial information.
Privacy issues continue to be topics for potential state and federal legislation.
Though the banking industry is rightfully concerned about the effects of these legislative initiatives, it must remember that privacy is a political issue because it reflects the genuine concern of bank customers.
Providing the assurance of financial privacy is a vital part of managing technological change in the banking industry.
Another significant driver of change will be the opportunity for the banking industry to use the "financial in nature" or "complementary" opportunities for product development provided in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.
As markets changed in past years, the banking industry was limited in its ability to adjust to those changes.
As the industry becomes accustomed to the new provisions, we can realistically expect individual institutions to develop financial products or business lines based on core competencies or on market opportunities that would not have been available before the passage of the recent legislation.
Role of the Umbrella Regulator Changes in the market and the adoption of Gramm-Leach-Bliley have brought an enhanced role and have expanded the Federal Reserve's role as an umbrella regulator.
In that role, the Fed, along with the Treasury, will evaluate requests for new product approval.
Also, the Fed will work actively with the other federal and state regulators to ensure that the concept of functional regulation, which is a critical pillar of GLB, works well.
Additionally, we will continue to monitor institutions for safety and soundness and for their use of risk-management tools consistent with the business operations and risk exposures inherent in a bank's business models.
We must all work hard to meet the high expectations that the industry holds for itself and that the public expects of institutions entrusted with access to the payment system and to deposit insurance.
We will also continue to work through the Basel II negotiations to ensure that the largest U.S. banks are not disadvantaged in competing with banks abroad and that capital standards are implemented with sufficient rigor and consistency.

I am pleased to join you today.
Though I am not here to discuss financial and economic literacy, I would be remiss if I did not commend the North Carolina Bankers Association for sponsoring Camp Challenge, your summer camping and financial literacy program.
A forum like this provides an opportunity to discuss the evolving nature of community and regional banking, the traditional strengths of such banks, which many of you represent, and the challenges you face, day to day, in managing them in an era of rapid change.
More and more, it seems clear that future success will depend on your continuing to use some of banking's traditional advantages as well as on your ensuring that key aspects of risk management effectively address the new complexities of your business.
In short, community bankers must remain cognizant of the traditional means by which they have controlled and managed risks, continuing to do well what has been effective in the past, and invest both resources and effort in understanding and managing new features of the regional and community banking landscape.
Role of Regional and Community Banks in Our Economy It's useful for a moment to consider the importance of community and regional banking in this country.
Although a small number of the largest banks in the country control the majority of the nation's deposits and banking assets, regional and community banks remain vital to our economy.
Time and time again, we have seen the larger banking organizations concentrating resources in a given market segment, reducing their efforts in others, even sometimes pulling out of communities that don't easily fit into their plans.
As a result, in many parts of the country, regional and community banks are the dominant financial institutions actively serving the local trade area.
But even where they are not the dominant players in a market, smaller banking organizations are traditionally very effective competitors.
One enabling factor, to be sure, is that regional and community banks are quick to embrace the benefits brought about by technological change.
However, a truly key competitive advantage, which smaller banks continually seek to leverage, is their personal contact with their customers.
Successful community bankers affirmatively seek to be seen as neighbors and supporters of their depositors and borrowers.
It is in large measure through such contact and personal knowledge of customers and community that successful bankers, small or large, maintain a significant presence in the market and demonstrate commitment to their communities.
Indeed, time after time we have seen that community banks have gained market share when large banks entered their market by acquisition; anecdotal evidence indicates that the gains have gone to existing community bankers and de novo entrants, both faring well in competition with their large out-of-market rival.
Moreover, regional and community banks are bankers to many small businesses.
More than 99 percent of all employers in this country are classified as "small businesses."
Small businesses as a group employ fully one-half of all private-sector workers and provide the lion's share of net new jobs in the economy.
With small businesses as primary commercial customers, regional and community banks have long been, and will continue to be, an element of strength in our economy.
Consequently, the safe and sound operation of regional and community banks must be ensured.
At the same time, these banking organizations must be encouraged to be innovative in meeting the needs of their customers.
The competitive advantages of smaller institutions are not without accompanying benefits for the management of traditional risks in the banking business.
The management of credit risk, historically the most significant exposure of banks, is the obvious case in point.
Personal knowledge of customers--their character, opportunities, competence, resources, and capacity for repayment--not only is the competitive "leg up" in establishing a sound and mutually profitable credit relationship, it also helps a successful community banker in setting the baseline for serving the customer (and the bank) by gauging the appropriate extent and the terms of that relationship.
Misfortune will occur sometimes, and business conditions will periodically weaken, as those events have occurred routinely in the past.
But no one in the community--customer or bank--is served by the extension of credit that would be judged unsound in the light of the customer's capacity to perform when that credit was granted.
Increasing Complexity of Regional and Community Banks Traditionally, smaller banking organizations have been regarded as subject primarily to credit risk, although interest, funding, and operational risks have also been major areas of concern.
Increasingly, however, liquidity and market risks have grown in significance as regional and community banks have gained greater access to less traditional sources of funds.
Competing alternatives to core deposits in the 1990s led many regional and community banks, even the smallest institutions, to rely increasingly on intermediary sources, such as deposit brokers, the Internet, and other automated service providers, to raise funding to support asset growth and meet loan demand.
Deposits gathered from such sources, even those not explicitly "brokered," can be less stable than traditional core deposits, since the depositors typically lack any other customer relationship with the institution and could shift funds to a different bank or investment in search of a higher return.
In addition, many regional and community banks today rely more heavily than in the past on wholesale borrowings from financial intermediaries, including other commercial banks and securities firms, to supply portions of their funding mix.
Indeed, regional and community banks have relied increasingly on the liability side of the balance sheet for funds management.
Most observers, for example, have been unaware of how successful community and regional bankers have been at directly raising uninsured deposits in their local markets when loan demands have exceeded core deposit growth.
In the latter half of the past decade, the uninsured deposits at these banks grew more rapidly than those at larger banks.
To be sure, large time deposits cost more than insured deposits, but community banks have maintained their profits and returns on equity.
The creativity that community banks have shown in supplementing their core deposits--deposits that have grown less rapidly as attractive substitutes became available for their customers--has once again surprised those that believe smaller banks can no longer compete in modern financial markets.
Such ingenuity in funding supplements their creativity in maintaining and increasing their loan base in the competition with their larger rivals.
This ingenuity also increases the need for closer management of funding at the same time that regional and community banks' investment portfolios have become more complex, with holdings of instruments that are in some cases longer-dated or have more options, than traditional bank investments.
Even in terms of the capital base, the widespread use of trust-preferred securities has introduced additional complexity to regional and community bank holding company balance sheets.
The expanded use and acceptance of asset-backed securities have also enabled regional and community banks to take advantage of what we, only a few years ago, considered, to be "large bank" opportunities to originate and sell large volumes of mortgages and other consumer loans, either directly to purchasing intermediaries or indirectly through a securitization vehicle.
To be sure, the sale and securitization of assets give rise to varying types and degrees of risk to the originating institution.
Typically the risk of credit losses from the underlying assets is divided variously among the parties to the transaction, including investors, guarantors, and the originating institution itself.
In many cases, the originating institution retains significant credit exposure through the credit enhancements that it provides.
These enhancements constitute contractual obligations to protect investors who have purchased the securities generated by the transaction from incurring credit losses.
These contractual recourse exposures, as you well know, are addressed in the agencies' risk-based capital standards, including an interagency rule implemented in January of this year that establishes a concentration limit and imposes a dollar-for-dollar capital charge on certain residual interests.
But it may be less well known that banks that engage in securitization activities need to be wary of taking any action, such as providing post-sale support to a securitization in excess of any contractual obligation, that would suggest it has implicit recourse exposure to losses beyond the contractually stated amount.
Banking organizations that are deemed to be providing implicit recourse are required, in general terms, to treat the entire outstanding amount of assets sold as though it remained on the books for risk-based capital purposes.
Finally, numerous third-party vendors and service providers today offer regional and community banks more and more products and financial services--delivered through traditional channels as well as the Internet--so that banks, in turn, can meet the increasingly sophisticated needs and demands of their customers.
As a consequence, many smaller banking organizations face additional complexities in their business and new or heightened exposures attendant to the on- or off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities, and revenues and operating costs, associated with these arrangements.
New funding sources and activities are critical in carrying on the traditional community banking business and in profitably serving customers.
But the Federal Reserve has supervisory responsibilities, and I would be remiss if I did not note that the development of these new sources is a mixed blessing.
New funding sources, while enabling community banks to meet loan demand, challenge the institutions to manage the potential volatility and price sensitivity of these funds.
The increased complexity of investment portfolios and off-balance-sheet activity similarly subjects institutions to increased liquidity and market risk.
The issuance of trust preferred stock through pooled securities has enhanced the access of smaller banking organizations to capital, though it leverages common equity of the parent company and, in some cases, puts pressure on insured subsidiaries to support the increased cash-flow requirements of these instruments.
Reliance on large time deposits requires that offering rates remain competitive with the market, creating interest-rate risk that must be managed.
Securitization activity, as noted above, can provide a hugely significant alternative funding for, even to some smaller banking organizations, but it entails certain recourse obligations and exposures and may involve additional liquidity, market, and reputational risks.
The use of third-party vendors and service providers, while expanding the menu of fee-based products and services that can be offered by regional and community banks, presents numerous challenges, particularly in terms of operational risks.
Risk Management Banking is a highly leveraged and often relatively low-margin business.
The loss from a single significant credit relationship or a material breakdown in controls can offset the gain on many other transactions.
Losses stemming from a concentration of sources--related borrowers or activities--can threaten the viability of the bank.
Bank managers as well as supervisors need to remember, therefore, that the benefits of the new developments mentioned above--access to funding alternatives, potentially higher-margin investments and activities--are counterbalanced in part by higher risks associated with increasing complexity.
Successful risk management today implies some additional cost and investment to ensure that systems for measuring, monitoring, and controlling risk are fully capable of addressing the new complexity of regional and community banks.
A key advantage of smaller banking organizations in managing credit risk--close knowledge of their customers' prospects and capacity to service debt--is less relevant in addressing many of the new risks they face.
Many of these new risks are market-driven or entail complexities with which the bank has little experience.
Indeed, I urge community and regional bankers to recognize that the same market realities that created the need to adopt new funding sources and activities also require that these banks invest in appropriate new risk-management techniques.
I realize that these often look like pure cost increases, but I assure you that they go hand in hand with the new activities and will ensure the continued ability of community and regional banks to successfully adapt to changing markets.
Indeed, the traditional characteristics of many small and even regional institutions--including local ownership and control by interested and involved individuals, a limited span of relatively simple operations, and effective management-- still can be relied on to ensure that new risks are properly identified and effectively managed.
The need for traditional prudential policies will not be obviated by new risk-management techniques.
Federal Reserve examiners will continue to look at four key components of risk-management systems in evaluating the management of supervised institutions.
These components are: the effective identification, monitoring, and reporting of risks, the sufficiency of policies and limits for controlling those risks, the adequacy of internal controls ensuring adherence to approved limits, and active oversight of these processes by directors and senior managers.
These four elements, taken together, provide a widely applicable framework for assessing risk management, though the detailed components of risk management can vary considerably among institutions.
For example, when a bank's exposures to credit, market, and operations risk are routine, well understood, and limited in their dimensions, fairly simple risk-management processes can suffice.
More complex assets, liabilities, and business activities, however, will demand more elaborate processes and internal controls.
And concentrated exposures of any kind, whether to credit or to funding risks, need to be identified and made subject to well-considered and reasonable limits.
Whatever the complexity and design of the processes, however, the four core elements are interdependent.
As a consequence, each of the four components must be comprehensively addressed for the entire system to be effective.
Effective risk-management processes are also a strong deterrent to fraud.
Irrespective of the level of risk inherent in bank activities, we must remember the fact that banks, particularly those with less robust risk-management and internal controls, are highly susceptible to customer or insider fraud and to mismanagement or, occasionally, insider abuse.
More often than not, it is the failure or absence of basic internal controls and risk-management processes that permits such losses, or fails to bring them to light before serious damage results.
A sound and comprehensive internal control system is based on the core principle of separation of duties and naturally includes a fully effective audit program.
But--importantly--it also encompasses ongoing procedures for the independent reconcilement and certification of bank records to ensure that basic controls are functioning effectively.
Conclusion In closing, I emphasize the need for risk-management processes in community and regional banks to advance sufficiently to meet the risk-management challenges of the banks' current environment.
Though often those challenges might be met by adapting sound practices long pursued in the organization, for an increasing number of banks, new systems and procedures may be needed to keep pace with the more-complex risks associated with an evolving or a growing business.
As bankers, bank supervisors, and policymakers, we should strive to work together to ensure that those risk-management processes are sufficiently robust and that they have been tested to ensure their effectiveness.
A final word may be in order after so much discussion of the need to adopt more-sophisticated risk management at community banks.
You have no doubt heard about the changes in capital processes being discussed in Basel by the supervisors of the major industrial countries.
These changes are being proposed mainly for the large, complex, internationally active banking organizations of the world, whose operations and business needs have developed beyond the intended reach of the current capital requirements.

