At every stage of life, individuals ought to make judgments about their likely earnings before retirement and their desired lifestyle in retirement.
Also implicit in such decisions are assumptions about prospective rates of return, life expectancy, and the possible accumulation of a nest egg for one's children.
The difficulty that individuals face in making these projections and choices is compounded by the need to forecast personal and economic events many years into the future.
Insurance companies make some of the same judgments in calculating premiums for annuity contracts or life insurance.
Defined-benefit pension plans make similar calculations for large groups of employees.
The social security and medicare trustees replicate some of the same calculations in their annual assessments of the actuarial viability of those programs.
Aside from these institutionalized forms of retirement saving, of course, is the discretionary saving that each of us does consciously by periodically setting aside portions of our income.
All of the above, and more, are required to assess the adequacy of retirement saving for an economy as a whole.
Most economic forecasts are subject to significant uncertainty.
At least by comparison, one judgment looks to be a reasonably sure proposition: the ratio of retirees to those still working will rise precipitously starting at the end of this decade, and that ratio will continue to climb through the first third of this century and remain high thereafter.
In part, this projected development owes to the retirement of the baby boomers.
But the phenomenon is broader than that and reflects the aging of our society.
Importantly, according to the social security trustees, the demographic challenge will not go away with the passing of the baby-boom generation.
This ever-larger retired population will have to be fed, clothed, housed, and serviced by a workforce growing far less rapidly.
The retirees may have accumulated a large stock of retirement savings, but the goods and services needed to redeem those savings must be produced by an active workforce assisted by a stock of plant and equipment sufficiently productive to meet the needs both of retirees and of a workforce expecting an ever-increasing standard of living.
Though from the point of view of an individual household, saving reflects financial claims adequate to meet future needs, the focus for the economy as a whole, of necessity, must be on producing the real resources needed to redeem the financial assets.
The role of finance is to channel saving into investment of the physical capital assets that assist in the production of the gross domestic product, which, in turn, serves both retirees and active workers.
Clearly, an efficient system of finance can more effectively deploy a given stock of capital and thus maximize its contribution to supporting the population.
Any analysis of the amount and type of saving required to finance the bulge in retirements that is just over the horizon needs to project (1) the number of retirees, (2) the size of our workforce, and (3) the productivity of that workforce.
Of the three, productivity is most directly affected by the level of investment, which, of course, is financed by saving.
The size of the future workforce, excluding immigrants, and the size of the future retired population are relatively simple to project from today's existing age distribution.
The level of immigration, both legal and illegal, will be dominated by public policy decisions and by economic forces, both in the United States and in the countries from which our immigrants are drawn.
This forecast is more problematic, and its level matters: Over the past decade, for example, immigration accounted for approximately one-third of the increase in our workforce.
The larger our workforce in 2010 and beyond, the easier producing goods and services for both retirees and active workers will be.
Immigration policy will, therefore, be a key component of baby-boom retirement policy.
The rate of saving--for retirement and other purposes--may not directly affect either the number of retirees or the size of the workforce.
But it surely affects capital investment, which it finances, and the productivity that it engenders.
Besides the total amount of saving and investment, changes in the allocation of those funds among different types of capital also appear to have some influence on the growth of labor productivity.
A dollar of new saving flows through financial markets to firms that allocate it among different types of capital investment.
Clearly, firms' choices about the types of investments to make matter crucially for how much labor productivity ultimately is boosted.
In the late 1990s, for example, businesses allocated much more of their investment dollars toward high-tech, higher-return capital than they did in earlier years.
Businesses made this shift and are continuing to move further in that direction in response to the extremely rapid decline in the prices of high-tech assets and the new opportunities that these assets have afforded.
According to one set of calculations, of the roughly 2-1/2 percent annual rate of increase in output per hour, or labor productivity, between 1995 and 2001, perhaps a quarter of that growth could be attributed to on-going shifts in the composition, as distinct from the dollar level, of capital.
Improvements in the quantity and quality of education of our workforce enhance workers' skills and contribute importantly to the growth of labor productivity.
But far more important over the past six years are the gains in output attributable to technological innovation, especially information technology and improved managerial organization, and as I noted in testimony yesterday, the greater flexibility and resilience of our economy stemming from deregulation, primarily in finance.
Notwithstanding these more intangible contributions, the level of saving remains a key ingredient of economic growth.
But we need also to know whether the source of that saving is sustainable, and beyond that, whether the type of financial assets in which our saving overall is accumulated affects our productivity.
During the past six years, about 40 percent of the total increase in our capital stock in effect has been financed, on net, by saving from abroad.
This situation is reflected in our ongoing current account deficit, which, by definition, is a measure of our net investment in domestic plant and equipment financed with foreign funds, both debt and equity.
But this deficit is also a measure of the increase in the level of net claims, primarily debt claims, that foreigners have on our assets.
As the stock of such claims grows, an ever larger flow of interest payments must be provided to the foreign suppliers of this capital.
Countries that have gone down this path invariably have run into trouble, and so would we.
Eventually, the current account deficit will have to be restrained.
The nation's economic potential will be brighter if that comes about through an increase in domestic saving rather than a reduction in domestic investment.
Whether the mix of domestic private and government saving affects the rate of productivity growth is a more contentious issue.
Another is whether the form of private saving, for example, whether in stocks or debt instruments including bank deposits, affects productivity growth.
Ultimately, the composition of real investment in our economy will reflect--among other influences--the attitudes toward risk of those who own the financial claims against the capital stock.
If savers become more risk-tolerant, financial risk premiums will decline.
In response to these reduced penalties on risk, firms will eventually adjust the mix of their endeavors toward more-speculative projects--but, importantly, presumably ones that also offer higher prospective rates of return on average, which more often than not translate into higher long-term average economic growth.
The nation's savers, daily in the marketplace, exhibit an obvious sensitivity to the association between expected return and risk.
Indeed, many are clearly willing to forgo the higher long-term rates of return on equity for the greater tranquility of the lesser risk associated with most debt instruments--in effect forsaking more economic growth for a more stable, less stressful, economic environment.
As a consequence, returns on common stocks over rolling twenty-year periods have almost always outpaced the returns on less risky securities.
The answer to whether government or private saving does more to foster productivity growth arguably thus comes down to the propensity to take risks by U.S. savers.
The less the willingness on the part of the nation's savers to hold risky securities, the more that business enterprises must be induced to undertake less risky endeavors.
That inducement will occur as relative preferences shift toward debt instruments and away from equity, thereby driving interest rates lower and earnings price ratios higher.
Government saving is largely reflected in a retirement of debt.
Having chosen to hold at least a portion of their savings in riskless securities, government debt holders when confronted with debt retirement presumably would chose less risky debt securities over common stocks to rebalance their portfolios.
Thus an increased share of saving from the government is a markedly more conservative financial strategy than if the saving were undertaken in the private sector.
Obviously, the federal government could invest in higher-risk assets, such as equities.
But for reasons that I have expressed many times before the Congress, I do not believe that, other than in defined-contribution plans, such investment can be accomplished free of political pressures that would distort the efficient use of capital.
Presumably, most of those who maintain that greater risk-taking would likely produce faster long-term growth would also acknowledge that increased competition and economic growth would bring greater volatility and social stress.
Because of the near certainty of a major rise in the retiree-to-worker ratio in the next few decades, we now face the major challenge of setting policies for enhanced economic growth.
What level of personal stress, and some argue, increased inequality, which may be a byproduct of a highly competitive, high-octane economy, have we as a nation chosen?
Is the level compatible with the level of domestic saving and possibly the risk-taking that is consonant with the elevated level of productivity growth necessary to meet the needs of an aging population?
A national consensus on these questions is clearly missing.
This is doubtless an area for useful debate.
I cannot close a discussion about provisions for retirement without a few words on social security.
Although the program replicates a private retirement annuity program in many ways, it is also quite different in several respects.
It requires contributions of workers, matched by those of employers.
But unlike a privately funded annuity program, the tie between contributions and benefits deliberately is not tight at the individual level.
If the Social Security Trust Fund is depleted, the law requires that benefits be paid only to the extent that they can be financed out of current payroll tax receipts.
But I cannot imagine a viable political scenario in which full payment of benefits will not be forthcoming.

The unfolding concerns in recent months about the quality of the accounting, auditing, and disclosure practices of major nonfinancial and financial companies give added importance to our discussions here.
As banking supervisors, we have increasingly recognized the importance of sound accounting and disclosure in our risk-focused examination policies, capital adequacy approaches, and risk-management practices to address the growing complexity of banking organizations.
As organizations grow in size and scope, outside investors have more difficulty understanding a particular firm's unique combination of risks and business line earnings.
Modern risk-management tools can describe risk in ways that traditional accounting standards for recognition and measurement cannot.
Thus, disclosure of firms' risk-management positions and risk management strategies--not necessarily another accounting schedule--is becoming a key component of improving market transparency.
Tonight, I would like to address the role of disclosure in describing the risk exposures of financial organizations.
Evolution of Risk Management The last decades of the twentieth century were, without doubt, periods of dramatic change in financial engineering, financial innovation, and risk management practices.
Traditionally, net interest income has been the primary source of income to bankers.
Deposit interest rates in the United States were fixed by regulators until the 1970s and rarely changed, so that fixed-rate, term loans did not create significant income volatility.
By the end of the 1970s, however, bankers in the United States were faced simultaneously with deregulation of interest rates on deposits and rising interest rates due to the prevailing high inflation.
In 1980, price and credit controls that were enacted to curb inflation further increased market volatility.
Bankers found themselves paying higher rates on outstanding six-month certificates of deposit than they received as interest on prime-rate loans when money market interest rates fell 800 basis points from March to June.
As a result, at the beginning of the 1980s, asset/liability models were developed at banks to help manage the effects of the variability of interest income and expense.
Banks began to match the repricing frequency of loans and investments against that of deposits and other funding sources.
Scenarios were created to determine the sensitivity of net interest income to varying interest rates and loan and deposit growth patterns.
Larger banks began to describe the volatility of their interest margins in the Management's Discussion and Analysis (MD&A) section of their annual and quarterly reports.
By the start of the 1990s, bankers had new tools to manage balance-sheet risk.
Loans could be securitized so that term-loan volume that exceeded fixed-rate funding could be sold to investors who would bear the risk of rising interest rates.
Securitization also meant that banks were better able to manage the periodic swings in liquidity when loan demand grew beyond the flow of new deposits.
Of course, the movement of loans off the balance sheet into special purpose entities, as well as the creation of servicing rights and high-risk residual interests retained by banks, has resulted in a different set of risks.
Derivatives have become another tool for banks to manage risk exposures.
A mismatch between the rate sensitivities of assets and those of liabilities creates the potential for unacceptably large swings in net interest income.
Banks can now use interest rate-based derivatives--options, futures, forwards, and so on--to mitigate their exposures by changing the timing of interest-rate effects on net interest income.
Interest-rate derivatives are also used to hedge fee income and expense streams, such as mortgage servicing rights.
Credit-risk management has evolved in a similar way.
New tools supplement the credit judgments of individual lending officers making decisions within the criteria established by the credit policies of their organizations.
Today, scoring models help them quickly decide on applications for consumer and small business loans because the small size and large number of these types of credits make them particularly amenable to statistical modeling.
Since these models have not been in place throughout the course of a full credit cycle in the United States, they lack the validity that additional experience will bring.
Larger, more complicated credits still require individual credit analysis by loan officers, but tools have been developed to manage the resulting credit exposures.
Loan syndications help the lead bank to diversify risk by limiting the size of individual credits in the loan portfolio.
Credit derivatives and notes allow further mitigation of risk by transferring unwanted exposures to other market participants.
Thus, credit officers today can mitigate and diversify risk with new tools that go beyond the traditional underwriting criteria that had been used in the past to establish the risk appetite of the bank.
The Complex Organization Mergers and the expanded powers given to financial institutions by both law and regulation have increased the size and variety of operations within leading financial organizations.
Significant developments in financial theory and technology have enabled innovations in financial instruments that facilitate the separation and reallocation of risks to parties more willing and able to bear them.
The pace of financial innovation has quickened considerably.
The twenty-first century will see financial firms offer, and businesses use, almost limitless possible configurations of products and services and sophisticated financial structures.
A byproduct of these developments will be that it will become ever more difficult for outsiders to understand the positions of financial organizations and snapshot financial reporting as of a moment of time will be less meaningful.
Indeed, as financial and technological innovation continues, financial institutions and businesses generally will necessarily engage in more complex activities.
In response, the risk management practices of businesses and banks should adjust.
Transparency requires that as these practices advance, so must the approaches used by firms to disclose their financial condition and performance as well as their risk profile and risk-management activities.
Nonetheless, the intended or unintended risk of opaqueness that comes with complexity raises serious issues, particularly as entities become larger and more complicated and hence increasingly difficult to supervise.
The Federal Reserve and other banking supervisors around the world have recognized the importance of market discipline in encouraging sound risk management practices and in promoting the stability of financial markets.
Effective market discipline can complement bank supervision and regulation.
But its prerequisite is having the information necessary to understand the risks in the entity the market is observing.
With sufficient, timely, accurate, and relevant information, market participants can better evaluate counterparty risks and adjust the availability and pricing of funds to promote better allocation of financial resources.
Lenders and investors have an obvious interest in meaningfully assessing a firm's risk-management performance, underlying trends, cash flow, and income-producing potential.
In this regard, transparency is essential to providing market participants with the information they need to effect market discipline.
Sound, well-managed companies can benefit if enhanced disclosure enables them to obtain funds at risk premiums that more accurately reflect their lower risk profiles.
On the other hand, well-managed firms could be penalized as a result of inadequate disclosures if market participants are unable to assess their fundamental financial strength and sound risk-management practices.
Achieving Sound Accounting and Disclosure Practices for Complex Firms While most market participants favor sound accounting standards and meaningful disclosure, it has become clear in recent months that some companies have not been completely transparent in their application of accounting and disclosure standards to specific transactions.
In these situations, accounting practices and techniques have neither reflected nor been consistent with how the business has been run, that is, its overall business strategy.
As a result, the market was not able to appropriately discipline the risk-taking activities of these firms on a timely basis because it lacked the information from either financial statements or other disclosures to do so.
As information became available, as it virtually always will at some point, the market reflected its concerns about underlying business practices and accounting through the declining values of equity and debt instruments and in the rates charged by counterparties to obtain funds.
These premiums were placed not only on offending firms but also on those whose statements might have also lacked some clarity.
The message is clear that the marketplace will respond quickly when companies are found to lack sound accounting and disclosure practices.
At this point, we do not have all of the facts about many of the situations involving alleged accounting and auditing problems, but consensus is growing that changes should be made to some underlying accounting standards and to their application by companies and their auditors.
Many different groups are undertaking initiatives to correct the problems that have recently been identified.
For example, the U.S. Financial Accounting Standards Board and the International Accounting Standards Board are considering how to improve the accounting for financial instruments and standards for consolidated financial statements so as to achieve greater transparency of companies' exposures to special purpose vehicles and other unconsolidated entities.
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has issued recommendations that focus on disclosures regarding liquidity and capital resources, including off-balance-sheet arrangements; certain trading activities that include non-exchange-traded derivatives accounted for at fair value; and the effects of transactions with related parties and certain other parties.
The accounting profession has announced initiatives to curb external auditors of publicly traded companies from also providing internal audit and consulting services to their clients.
Possible regulatory measures are being explored and many other fundamental reforms are under development by private-sector organizations.
Improvements in accounting and auditing standards are needed to address the potential problems that have been identified.
In particular, it would be very helpful if fundamental principles and standards could be revised to emphasize that the financial statements should clearly and faithfully represent the economic substance of business transactions.
We need to insist on higher professional standards and not permit financial officers and auditors to benefit from "gaming" the rules-based accounting standards that are increasing in complexity, particularly in the United States.
Standards should ensure that companies give appropriate consideration to the substantive risks and rewards of ownership of the underlying assets in identifying whether risk exposures should be reflected in consolidated financial statements.
In addition to applying sound accounting treatments, company managers must ensure that public disclosures clearly identify all significant risk exposures--whether on or off the balance sheet--and their impact on the firm's financial condition and performance, cash flow and earnings potential, and, for regulated institutions, capital adequacy.
Equally important are disclosures about how risks are being managed and the underlying basis for values and other estimates included in financial reports.
A sound risk-management system should continually monitor risks in a changing business climate --including credit, market, liquidity, and operational risks.
Disclosures consistent with the information used internally by risk managers could be very beneficial to market participants.
Information on the sensitivity to changes in underlying assumptions could also be very meaningful to financial statement users.
Companies should ensure that they not only meet the letter of the standards that exist but also that their financial reports and other disclosures focus on what is really essential to help investors and other market participants understand their businesses.
I particularly want to emphasize that disclosure need not be in a standard accounting framework nor exactly the same for all--otherwise we would be certain to create statistical artifacts and implications of safe harbors.
Rather, what we should all be insisting on is that each entity disclose what that entity believes its stakeholders need to evaluate the entity's risk profile.
Companies should be less concerned about the vehicle of disclosure and more concerned with the substance of what is made available to the public.
Enterprise Risk Management and Disclosure Leading companies have been taking advantage of the new innovations in risk management.
New functions for chief risk officers are being created so that they can provide comprehensive oversight of the various risk exposures of the enterprise.
The chief risk officer is an executive officer charged with independently monitoring risk identification, measurement, mitigation, and controls.
A primary responsibility of the chief risk officer is oversight of risk reporting within the company.
Unlike typical accounting reports, information generated by risk management tends to be oriented less to a point in time and more to a description of the risks.
For example, accounting information might report that the book value or disclosed fair value of a loan portfolio is $300 million and has dropped $10 million from the last report.
However, the risk report would show much more extensive information, such as the term and interest rate of the assets, their credit quality, and the range of values the portfolio would take under alternative future scenarios.
The user of the report could tell if changes in value were due to declining credit quality, rising interest rates, or sales or payoffs of loans.
By tracking the amount of loans in each internal credit grade and the amount of allowances or "provisions" set aside in each "bucket" for inherent losses, the user of the report could determine whether the credit risk of the portfolio was increasing or decreasing.
Other reports that risk officers are developing provide information on the extent to which the total return in a particular line of business compensates for its comprehensive risk.
On an enterprise basis, a reader would be able to tell if the growing lines of business have risk exposures that tend to be offsetting and that thereby make the earnings of the corporation as a whole less volatile.
Financial institutions should continue improving their risk management and reporting functions.
When they are comfortable with the reliability and consistency of the information in these reports, they should begin disclosing this information to the market, perhaps in summary form.
Not only would this disclosure provide more qualitative and quantitative information to the market, but the resulting discussion about risk management practices would help the market assess the quality of the risk oversight and risk appetite of the organization.
Banking Supervision and Accounting and Disclosure The Federal Reserve has long supported sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure by banking and financial organizations with the objective of improving market discipline and fostering stable financial markets.
The concept of market discipline is assuming greater importance among international banking supervisors as well.
The most recent proposal to amend and augment the Basel Capital Accord, which was published in January 2001 and called Basel II, seeks to strengthen the market's ability to aid bank supervisors in regulating capital adequacy.
It consists of three pillars, or tools: risk-based capital (pillar I), risk-based supervision (pillar II), and disclosure of risks and capital adequacy to enhance market discipline (pillar III).
This approach to capital regulation, with its market-discipline component, signals that sound accounting and disclosure will continue to be important aspects of our supervisory approach for many years to come.
Our goal in the Basel process is to develop a risk-sensitive framework that provides appropriate incentives to banking organizations to maintain strong capital positions and sound risk-management systems.
The history of the 1990s, which includes episodes of global financial instability spreading from small countries through international capital markets and banks, underscores the need to maintain adequate capital in the internationally active banks.
For the sake of maintaining global financial stability, I hope that everyone values that goal.
Basel II would also improve risk disclosure by many banks worldwide.
The proposal recommends specific disclosures to better convey an institution's capital adequacy and risk profile.
The incentives in Basel II should greatly diminish the opacity that cloaks many international financial institutions and help bring about a convergence of international norms on banking disclosure.
I believe that counterparties will expect, indeed force, greater disclosure.
Recent history certainly teaches us that understanding what drives a counterparty's financial performance and its risk appetite is necessary for accurately pricing any transaction or even for deciding whether to engage in a transaction.
Conclusion Sound accounting, auditing, and disclosure concepts, consistently applied, have long been at the heart of efficient markets.
Accounting and auditing standards setters should continue their efforts to make more meaningful information available in financial statements and other reports.
At the same time, the more complex nature of organizations--and constantly changing services, customers, and business conditions--imply that market participants need additional types of information to make appropriate investment decisions.

