As you will hear, recent readings on the economy suggest that the pace of economic activity has picked up of late, our financial system is healthy, and inflation pressures remain subdued.
Although uncertainties remain, I believe that the economic fundamentals are now in place to generate a sustainable, non-inflationary upturn.
As always, the views that I will express are my own and do not necessarily reflect those of the Board of Governors or the staff of the Federal Reserve System.
I am going to describe the key factors that have dominated this recession and recovery.
Then I will talk about the current state of the household and business sectors.
Finally, I want to make some remarks about corporate-sponsored, defined-benefit pension plans.
The Recent Economic Cycle Before delving into current events, I think it is helpful to review some of the key aspects of our recent economic history.
After a record, ten-year economic expansion, the U.S. economy slipped into recession in March 2001.
This recession was unusual in that it was led by a drop in business investment, rather than a decline in consumer spending.
According to the National Bureau of Economic Research (the traditional record keeper of U.S. business cycles) the downturn lasted eight months--a bit less than the duration of the average post-war recession.
But thereafter, between the trough of the recession in 2001 and the second quarter of this year, real gross domestic product grew at a rather disappointing annual rate of 2-3/4 percent, on average.
Although household disposable income and spending increased appreciably over this period, capital spending continued to weaken.
Indeed, in the second quarter of this year, real business fixed investment was 4 percent below its level at the trough of the recession--an unusually weak investment performance almost two years into a recovery.
Financial conditions undoubtedly played an important role in these developments.
In the late 1990s, financial conditions were easy.
Very narrow risk premiums in both debt and equity markets and lofty expectations about returns on the part of investors and borrowers greatly reduced the cost of external funds.
A frenzy of capital-raising followed, led by telecommunication and Internet firms.
Corporate debt and equity issuance soared--adding almost $2 trillion in new debt and equity to the balance sheets of nonfinancial corporations from 1998 through 2000 alone, with a good portion of the money raised by risky firms in the junk bond, venture capital, and initial public offering (IPO) markets.
Firms used the proceeds not only to fund investment, but also to finance acquisitions of other companies, stock repurchases, and operating expenses.
The spectacular collapse of high-tech equity valuations in the spring of 2000, led by the same telecommunication and Internet firms, wreaked havoc with corporate credit quality in some sectors and began a prolonged retrenchment in financial markets.
Subsequently, financial markets were buffeted with a barrage of terrorism, war, and corporate governance shocks that further eroded investor confidence and stoked uncertainty and pessimism.
The consequent retreat from risk-taking led to a substantial markdown in asset values, with obvious negative consequences for portfolios.
Between early 2000 and the end of 2002, more than $6 trillion of stock-market wealth evaporated, and more than $200 billion of corporate bonds went into default.
Many of the telecommunication firms that did IPOs or issued junk bonds during the easy market conditions of the late 1990s went bankrupt.
For other firms, debt burdens that had appeared manageable suddenly looked excessive.
Investors and lenders rightly responded to these events by becoming more wary, and financial conditions accordingly became more restrictive.
Businesses faced a similar set of shocks: bankrupt clients, elevated uncertainty, skeptical investors, and expected rates of return that had plummeted.
With limited pricing power and opportunities for sales expansion, businesses had to focus on expense management to increase their earnings.
Businesses re-engineered processes.
Their inventories and hiring slumped, and demand for funds fell.
Although tighter financial conditions contributed, this pullback reflected mainly defensive actions by the borrowers themselves.
Surveys of bank loan officers and small businesses support this view.
Both groups have consistently pointed to weak business demand as the main factor behind sluggish borrowing during this recovery.
In this environment, economists pushed out the expected date of the recovery in capital spending, and concerns grew that the household sector--the mainstay of the economic recovery--might become overextended and curtail its expenditures before capital spending perked up.
But this is not evident from recent data.
Business investment increased over the spring and summer, and the household sector remains in good financial health and has demonstrated a continued willingness to spend.
Let me now discuss these recent economic developments in more detail.
Households In the household sector, real personal consumption expenditures rose briskly over the summer, with strength widespread among the various types of goods and services.
Supporting these gains have been large increases in real disposable incomes, higher stock prices, and favorable buying attitudes among consumers.
The reductions in income tax withholding and the advance refund checks for the child tax credit mailed in late July and August likely added to the magnitude of the spending increases.
Homes sales and new residential construction remained very strong during the summer, although the rise in mortgage rates could result in some cooling in the housing sector in coming months.
Although households have been borrowing rather heavily to finance the rise in spending, they also have taken steps to keep the repayment burden of that debt in check.
Notably, many homeowners have taken advantage of low interest rates to refinance their mortgages, some having done so several times over the past couple of years.
In more than one-third of these "refis," the borrower took cash out during the transaction, often to pay down loans with higher interest rates.
The resulting drop in the average interest rate on household debt, combined with the increase in after-tax income, has helped households stay current on their loan obligations.
Indeed, delinquency rates on consumer and mortgage loans held by banks have been trending lower, and most other measures of household loan performance have been stable on net this year.
Businesses Capital spending by businesses increased at an annual rate of 7-1/4 percent in the second quarter, and orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods--a key indicator of equipment spending--rose briskly over the June-to-August period.
Moreover, the tenor of anecdotes from the corporate sector seems more upbeat, as corporate managers see sales picking up and the financing environment improving.
Four important factors have contributed to this improvement in financial conditions: a widespread restructuring of corporate liabilities over the past two years, a bounceback in corporate profitability from its trough in 2001, a narrowing in market risk premiums, and low interest rates.
I will discuss each factor in turn.
First, pulled by low long-term rates and pushed by nervous investors burned by a few high-profile, rapid meltdowns, firms have done a great deal to strengthen their balance sheets.
Many firms have refinanced high-interest-rate debt, paring the average interest rate on nonfinancial corporate debt by almost 150 basis points since the end of 2000.
At the same time, businesses have replaced short-maturity debt with longer-maturity debt, both to lock in low rates and to improve their ability to withstand a liquidity shock (since long-term debt does not need to be continually rolled over).
In addition, many firms--especially in the most troubled industries--have retired debt via equity offerings and asset sales, helping to hold growth of total nonfinancial corporate debt in 2002 to its smallest gain since the early 1990s.
Second, firms have significantly tightened their belts.
Over the past two years, the drive to cut costs has generated rapid productivity gains, and this greater efficiency has boosted corporate profits despite tepid revenue growth.
Profits at Standard & Poor's 500 corporations grew almost 6 percent in 2002 from depressed 2001 levels and have increased another 10 percent in the first half of this year.
Although this growth has been somewhat unevenly distributed across sectors, large-firm profits in the aggregate are now up smartly.
Profits at smaller firms, which had fallen more precipitously, also appear to have rebounded sharply.
Third, risk premiums have fallen substantially this year as corporate governance scandals are less notable and investor sentiment has turned favorable.
Stock prices reflect this brighter view.
The broadest index of stock prices--the Wilshire 5000--has risen about 20 percent so far this year, while the tech-heavy Nasdaq index and the Russell 2000 small-cap index have logged even more impressive gains.
Meanwhile, bond spreads have narrowed appreciably--especially for the riskiest firms--and are now back around historical averages.
Declining spreads have, no doubt, been helped along by the beneficial effect of the balance sheet improvements on measures of credit quality.
Indicators such as rating changes and default rates, though still elevated, have eased notably this year.
In another sign of improved sentiment, money has flowed into risky securities--for example, equity mutual funds have registered strong net inflows since March after net outflows in 2002 and early 2003, and extremely large inflows have boosted assets of high-yield bond funds nearly 15 percent over the same period.
Offerings of risky securities have also reappeared since March, including a handful of IPOs and many low-tier junk-bond deals among a surge of corporate bond issues.
Improved profitability, coupled with subdued capital spending, inventory investment, and hiring, has translated into better corporate cash flow.
Looking ahead, this larger income stream can help finance expansion directly out of internal funds or indirectly by supporting firms' borrowing capacity.
Furthermore, over the past year or so, many firms have retained their excess cash and built up liquid assets.
Thus, firms will be able to draw not only on improved cash flow but also higher liquid assets.
Fourth, and finally, the federal funds rate remains at just 1 percent.
As a result, extremely low short-term borrowing costs have helped firms keep their interest expenses down.
This is a direct benefit of the accommodative stance of monetary policy.
For longer-term debt, the combination of low yields on benchmark Treasury securities and reduced risk spreads has kept borrowing costs attractive.
The yield on Moody's Baa corporate bond index, although up a bit from this spring and summer, is otherwise at its lowest sustained level since 1968.
These four points all suggest that financial conditions are capable of supporting a sustained, healthy pickup in economic growth.
By and large, firms are well positioned to fund expansion both internally and externally.
And, given the successful efforts to pare costs, firms are set to benefit from a further pickup in the growth of revenue.
Thus, future rates of return should be favorable.
Accordingly, equity analysts are calling for S&P 500 profits to advance 5 percent more in the third quarter and by a similar amount in the fourth quarter of this year, before rising an additional 13 percent in 2004; and profits at small firms are expected to continue outpacing those at large firms.
As you know, banks are an important source of external funding for businesses.
Although a small number of individual banks have been weakened by the downturn, I do not see a need to worry about banks' overall health.
Banks continue to have strong financial positions and have weathered the credit deterioration in the corporate sector quite well, largely because of the improvement in their risk-management practices over the past decade.
In marked contrast to the 1990-91 recession, bank profitability reached record levels in the past two years, and bank capital continues to strengthen.
In addition, delinquency rates on most major loan categories have decreased noticeably since the end of 2001.
Employment, Productivity and Inflation So far, I have talked about the upbeat part of the current economic picture.
The downbeat portion is the lack of any appreciable improvement in the labor market.
Although aggregate demand appears to have grown rapidly in the third quarter, nonfarm payrolls continued to fall through August and increased only a bit in September--the result of ongoing efforts by businesses to restructure their operations and boost efficiency.
Based on recent economic research at the Federal Reserve and on many anecdotal reports, I suspect that a large part of these net job losses--particularly in manufacturing, airlines, and telecommunications--are permanent and will not be reversed as the economy gains steam.
Instead, new jobs will need to be created in other sectors of the economy to replace them.
This process will take time.
But if history is a guide, in an expanding economy job creation will eventually outstrip job destruction, and lower the unemployment rate.
The increase in payrolls in September was a start, and I hope will be followed by larger gains in future months.
I will be watching conditions in the labor market closely because an expansion that is sustainable in the long run will require solid growth in employment.
The flip side of this so-called jobless recovery is that labor productivity has been increasing very rapidly.
Output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose almost 7 percent in the second quarter, bringing the four-quarter change to more than 4 percent.
That pace is quite high by historical standards and suggests to me that the productivity gains of recent years are not cyclical developments that will disappear as labor demand strengthens but are permanent gains in efficiency.
That is good news because growth in labor productivity generates growth in real wages of workers and thus raises our nation's overall standard of living.
Strong growth in productivity also has been an element in the low rates of core consumer price inflation in recent years.
The personal consumption expenditure price index excluding food and energy increased only 1.3 percent over the twelve months ending in August--about 1/2 percentage point less than in the year-earlier period.
In the current environment of excess capacity and intense global competition, most businesses simply do not have the ability to raise prices.
As a result, I do not see a large risk of a pickup in the underlying pace of price inflation anytime soon.
Pension Obligations Before concluding, I would like to discuss an element of corporate financial statements that has attracted a good deal of negative attention lately--namely company pension obligations.
As you know, pension plans come in two varieties, with very different effects on corporate balance sheets and cash flow.
Defined-contribution plans, such as the 401(k) and 403(b) plans that many of you are familiar with, are essentially employee savings accounts and generally do not have much effect on corporate reports.
But traditional defined-benefit, or DB, plans can have large effects.
DB plans, which are more common in older and larger firms, promise workers a stream of benefits during retirement, and companies that sponsor them are required by law to set aside sufficient funds to cover the payments they have promised to their workers.
If the investment returns on the pension fund's assets are not enough to keep up with the growth in pension liabilities, firms must make additional pension contributions.
Three years of negative equity returns, combined with sharply falling interest rates, have put considerable stress on some DB plans.
Because pension funds typically invest more than half their portfolios in equities, stock market losses significantly eroded pension assets; at the same time, sharply declining interest rates raised the present value of future liabilities, weakening the funding status of many DB plans.
Just among the firms in the S&P 500, the combined effect was to subtract nearly half a trillion dollars from pension net asset values from the end of 1999 to the end of 2002.
At the end of 1999, about 20 percent of S&P 500 plans were underfunded, meaning that their assets were valued less than their liabilities.
But by the end of last year, the figure was 90 percent, and DB plan assets across all S&P 500 firms were more than $200 billion shy of liabilities.
The implication is clear: Many companies need to make additional contributions to their pension plans, and in some cases the contributions need to be large.
Indeed, last year S&P 500 firms contributed $46 billion to their pension plans, three times more than in either of the previous two years.
Some contributions were considerable, and this trend continued in the first half of 2003: Twenty-five sponsors of the most underfunded pension plans have already made contributions this year as large as last year's.
This situation does not mean investors should panic about the financial positions of the firms sponsoring these plans.
The bulk of the pension underfunding is concentrated at large firms with good access to capital markets.
Among S&P 500 firms last year, about 90 percent of the underfunding occurred in firms with investment-grade debt.
In the current market environment, these firms likely would have little difficulty raising funds to replenish their pensions.
This suggests that pension contributions will not likely be a major cash flow impediment to corporate investment.
That is not to say, however, that many firms--indeed, whole industries--are not struggling with their pension plans.
Severe cases can be found in the auto, steel, and airline industries, where long-term business structure issues make the recent business-cycle effects on pension plans more acute.
These firms face a confluence of negative trends, including increasing competitive pressures, aging workforces, rapidly growing retiree populations, and a history of collective bargaining agreements that emphasized larger pension benefits over wage increases.
Automakers currently face some of the largest dollar amounts of underfunding, but as noted earlier, they generally have good access to credit markets, which has allowed them to weather these difficulties.
Steel companies and airlines have had a harder time.
In the past two years, a half-dozen large, established steel firms and airlines have declared bankruptcy, and their pension plans either have collapsed or remain mired in uncertainty.
Not surprisingly, required pension contributions represent a greater burden on cash flow to the surviving firms in these troubled industries.
Although most DB pension contributions are made in cash, some airlines and steel companies have turned to making noncash contributions--company stock, generally--to their pension plans.
While this conserves cash for other uses, it increases the risk in plan funding since the value of plan assets will be more correlated with the health of the sponsor.
Thus when the company gets into financial difficulties, the ability to contribute to the pension plan will be the weakest just when the declining value of those plan assets requires larger contributions.
The recent experiences of the steel and airline industries, in particular, have led to the sudden reversal of fortune for the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, or PBGC--the federally chartered company that partially insures pension benefits by assuming the assets and some of the liabilities of failed plans.
Each time the PBGC takes over a bankrupt firm's plan, it assumes a new claim that comes due as the firm's workers retire.
New claims have skyrocketed in the past few years--from an average of $150 million per year in the late 1990s to $3.3 billion in 2002.
This year will be worse.
Thanks to several large new bankruptcies, claims exceeded $5 billion in just the first half of fiscal year 2003.
These plan failures have had an enormous impact on the PBGC's balance sheet, which swung from a net positive position of nearly $10 billion in 2000 to a net negative position of nearly $6 billion by July of this year.
Despite this negative position, the PBGC does not face an immediate liquidity crisis because of the relatively long duration of its liabilities and its steady stream of premium income from active plans.
However, it faces serious challenges beyond those indicated by its current balance sheet, including substantial underfunding that exists at troubled, but still operational, DB plans.
Indeed, the PBGC estimates that its annual tally of underfunding in "financially troubled" companies could exceed $80 billion this year.
So what is the prognosis for corporate pension plans in the near and long term?
For the near term, I see some indications that the stresses have abated somewhat.
So far this year, the financial condition of these plans have likely improved due to the rising stock market and higher contributions, although the precise extent of that improvement will not be known until year-end financial statements are released.
But under a reasonable set of assumptions, perhaps $50 billion of last year's S&P 500 funding gap, or about one-quarter of the total, apparently has already been closed by improved market conditions.
And what about the longer-term prognosis for S&P 500 firms?
Assuming current discount rates and normal pension asset returns, these firms would need to make about $150 billion in contributions to close the funding gap over the next three years.
And once the current funding hole is filled, these firms would still need to make contributions to cover their rising liabilities.
Indeed, DB plans are increasingly concentrated in mature industries with aging workforces, for which the growth rate of liabilities is relatively high (and rising), while their duration is relatively low (and falling).
These longer-term challenges remain even if market conditions improve.

Today, I want to re-visit the evolution and performance of the financial services industry, not only in light of what I discussed five years ago but also, more importantly, in light of a number of significant events and market developments that have occurred since then.
Clearly, I will be able neither to cover all the interesting topics nor to discuss in depth each of those subjects that I do include.
But I believe it is useful to step back occasionally and try to take a broad view of our detailed and complex financial landscape.
In the interest of full disclosure and for the benefit of those of you who either were not here five years ago or may not have committed my remarks to memory, I will begin by summarizing the conclusions I advanced the last time I spoke at this podium.
At that time I highlighted four general conclusions.
First, I suggested that the movement toward large financial conglomerates, stimulated by the ongoing blurring of traditional distinctions between financial products provided by commercial banks, investment banks, insurance companies, and other financial intermediaries, might prove to be transitory.
Second, I argued that basic financial and risk-management skills would likely remain the most important determinant of a company's viability and continued success.
Third, I maintained that, even in a world of financial conglomerates, there would be room for smaller and, in some cases, more-specialized market participants.
Last, I indicated that the supervisory and regulatory structure and practice would need to evolve to meet all of these challenges, and that regulatory authorities would need to remain vigilant in carrying out our duties, particularly in the area of antitrust enforcement.
These conclusions still seem reasonable to me.
That having been said, events and market forces require that we rethink and refocus our views, and your invitation gives me the opportunity to do so.
So, what have been the major factors that have influenced the financial services industry, and especially the banking industry, over the past five years?
And how should we interpret these developments with respect to their effects on the recent past and the future?
I see at least five broad topics that are worthy of our attention.
First, the recession of 2001 and the unusually slow recovery over the past two years have clearly affected the banking and financial services industry.
Second, the passage of the Gramm Leach Bliley Act in late 1999 recognized many of the market realities I discussed with you in 1998 and provided increased opportunity for the formation of large financial conglomerates.
Third, accounting and corporate governance scandals, symbolized by Enron and WorldCom, and the resulting passage of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in July 2002, have not left the financial services industry untouched.
Fourth, although the dot-com craze has ended, technological change has continued, and its influence on the present and future of financial services is pervasive.
Finally, all these developments and others, such as the Russian debt default in the fall of 1998, have accentuated the importance both of risk measurement and management at individual banks and of the need for supervisory policies and procedures to reflect and encourage modern risk management.
The Recession of 2001 Turning first to the recent recession and our unusually slow recovery, I think that the most remarkable fact regarding the banking industry during this period is its resilience and retention of fundamental strength, even at those institutions whose earnings were negatively affected by the slowdown.
Beginning about the time I last spoke to you, the U.S. financial system suffered a sharp increase in corporate bond defaults, business failures, and investor losses.
At commercial banks, troubled loans, including charge-offs, classified loans, and overdue credits, climbed.
In sharp contrast to other periods of economic weakness and market volatility, however, during the most recent period the vast majority of commercial banks remained unusually healthy.
Strong rates of return on both equity and assets and healthy capital ratios were all maintained.
Perhaps most tellingly, the period from 1998 through 2002 averaged only five bank failures per year.
Today, market measures of bank risk derived from stock prices, subordinated debt spreads, and credit default swap spreads all signal a healthy banking industry.
In contrast, in the last three years of the 1980s, more than 200 banks failed on average each year (not to mention a larger number of savings and loans).
Even in 1993, two years after the 1990-91 recession ended, slightly more than 100 banks failed.
To what can we attribute the recent outstanding performance, and will it be repeated in future economic slowdowns?
In truth, our current good fortune stems from many factors, none of which can we count on recurring but several of which we can somewhat control.
One factor is that the most recent recession was relatively short and weak, even though the recovery has been slow.
That the Federal Reserve moved early and aggressively to lower interest rates has also been very helpful to banks and other participants in the U.S. economy.
I suspect that many of you in this room have refinanced your mortgages, perhaps more than once, over the past two years.
Maybe some of you even cashed out, or extracted, some of the equity you had accumulated in your house when you refinanced your old loan.
Such mortgage-related activities have helped consumers to maintain their expenditures, have helped the overall economy to grow, and have contributed significantly to the earnings of the banking system.
These earnings have helped banks absorb losses elsewhere in their portfolios and to maintain loan loss reserves.
Indeed, in the second quarter of this year, the fifty largest U.S. bank holding companies reported record earnings of more than $20 billion, and annualized rates of return on equity and assets were very impressive.
Another important factor is that the U.S. banking system entered the current period of stress well capitalized and with strong reserves.
No doubt such balance sheets were due in very large part to the economic prosperity of the second half of the 1990s.
But I believe that other forces were also at work.
Certainly bankers themselves learned many lessons from the banking and thrift crises of the late 1980s and early 1990s, including the importance of having strong capital and reserves and of avoiding obligor and industry concentration of credit risk.
Perhaps equally important were the banking reforms put in place in the aftermath of those crises.
Of the many reforms, I highlight the emphasis on strong capital positions provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act of 1991 and other changes in supervisory policy, such as the move toward risk-based capital standards embodied in the 1988 international capital agreement known as the Basel Accord.
I hope that bankers and their supervisors will remember these lessons well into the future.
I also point to another reason that the U.S. banking system has performed so well over the current economic cycle.
This factor is the truly impressive improvement in methods of risk measurement and management and the growing adoption of these technologies by mostly large banks and other large financial intermediaries over the past five years.
To be sure, at most banks the application of these methods is still in its infancy, if it has begun at all, and even the most advanced banks have room for improvement.
But modern advances in the quantification of risk and in its management have provided bank management with a far more disciplined and structured process for evaluating loans, pricing risks, and deciding which risks to retain.
Careful judgment by experienced credit officers or risk managers is still required, but the modern techniques developed by both academics and market practitioners are tools that facilitate a much deeper evaluation of risk than was possible even a decade ago.
These developments have been supported and encouraged by the growth of markets for syndicated loans and securitized assets and the creation of new financial instruments, such as credit derivatives, that greatly ease the dispersion of risk to those more willing and able to bear it.
Do not misunderstand me.
New risk-management techniques and instruments bring their own problems, some of which I will return to in a moment.
But, in my view, the successful application by those banks taking advantage of these new management tools and techniques has been an important part of the explanation for why the banking system has remained so strong during our most recent period of stress.
Gramm-Leach-Bliley and the Potential for Financial Conglomerates When I spoke to you in the fall of 1998, the financial conglomerate was a very hot topic.
Indeed, just a little more than a year after that date, the Congress enacted, and the President signed into law, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act.
The act recognized the market reality that it was becoming increasingly difficult to maintain traditional distinctions between many of the activities of commercial banks, investment banks, and insurance companies.
In response, the Congress relaxed long-standing restrictions on affiliations among these three types of entities.
To avoid extending the subsidy implicit in deposit insurance and access to the Fed's discount window and payment system guarantees to these new activities, the act required that most investment banking and insurance business in banking organizations be conducted in a legally separate financial holding company affiliate of a commercial bank.
In addition, the Congress required that, to be a part of a financial holding company, an institution must be well capitalized and well managed.
An interesting observation is the slow pace of change since 1999.
The slow pace is, no doubt, partly a result of the economic slowdown and the stock market decline.
But I suspect that these factors do not fully explain what has happened.
Indeed, I suggest that the financial conglomerate, or the financial supermarket, or whatever you want to call it, is in fact much more difficult to implement than many may have thought.
True, there were about 600 domestic financial holding companies of the end of 2002.
But less than one-third reported actually engaging in any new activities authorized by Gramm-Leach-Bliley, and about 80 percent of these report engaging in insurance agency activities, probably the least "new" and least risky of all the possibilities provided by the act.
Only about forty institutions reported broker-dealer assets, around thirty reported insurance underwriting assets, and less than twenty said they held significant merchant banking assets using Gramm-Leach-Bliley authority.
Even accounting for the fact that some of these activities are conducted primarily at the largest financial holding companies, and recalling that large bank holding companies were already engaging in some of these activities through the previously authorized section 20 affiliates, we have not been able to uncover any evidence that the overall market structure of these segments of the financial services industry has substantially changed.
Of course, while the overall structure has not changed, some firms have gained market share in certain segments.
These facts do not suggest that we should be complacent regarding the need to maintain competitive markets in financial services.
It is difficult to overstate the benefits of competition, and thus I stand by my admonition of five years ago that policymakers should remain vigilant in antitrust enforcement.
Indeed, even though there have not been fundamental changes in the structure, in my judgment what deserves the emphasis is the persistent and even increasing competitiveness of the U.S. banking and financial markets.
Let me try to illustrate what I mean.
The U.S. banking system has experienced significant consolidation over the past several years.
Between 1994 and 2002 there were slightly more than 3,300 bank mergers in the United States, and almost $3 trillion in banking assets were acquired.
This consolidation led to considerable increases in national concentration among the largest banking organizations.
For example, the share of domestic banking assets held by the top five banking organizations went from 18 percent in 1994 to almost 32 percent in 2002, and the share of the top twenty-five went from 46 percent to 61 percent.
However, these numbers tend to hide more than they reveal about the competitiveness of the U.S. banking structure.
For example, at the end of 2002 there were still almost 6,500 commercial banking organizations in the United States, not to mention almost 1,400 savings institutions and almost 10,000 credit unions.
Moreover, between 1994 and 2002 more than 1,300 new banks were opened in the United States, sometimes in direct response to perceived declines in service resulting from a bank merger.
Most importantly, the degree of concentration in local banking markets, both urban and rural, declined modestly, on average, during this period.
Local markets are the very markets that are the focus of virtually all of our antitrust analysis because they are the markets where most households and small businesses conduct the vast majority of their banking business.
For all of these reasons, and for others that I do not have time to discuss, I would argue that the U.S. banking structure has generally remained competitive, and in some cases has become more competitive, over the recent period of intense merger activity and institutional and legislative change.
I am optimistic that this dynamic competitiveness, helped along every now and then by antitrust enforcement, will continue.
Accounting and Corporate Governance Many people, myself included, have found the last few years' revelations of accounting and corporate governance problems at many of our nation's most well-known corporations both disturbing and unacceptable.
The foundations of an efficient and competitive free market economy in a democratic society include accounting transparency, a commitment by owners, managers, and employees to high standards of ethical behavior, and the maintenance of internal organizational structures and incentives that encourage ethical behavior.
Unfortunately, some of the cases of unacceptable behavior have occurred in the financial services industry.
Inadequate oversight of business lines by boards of directors has been a problem in some instances.
In one recent case, this deficiency resulted in transactions with special purpose entities without adequate knowledge on the part of the board and without effective identification and management of risks.
More generally, we have seen transactions that elevated form over substance, violated accounting rules, and created serious reputational and legal risks for the institution, all with the apparent approval of outside auditors and lawyers.
In an attempt to deal with many of these and other issues, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act was enacted in late July 2002.
In addition, the Securities and Exchange Commission, bank regulators, state attorneys general, and others have taken many, sometimes well publicized, actions to improve accounting transparency and corporate governance.
Perhaps more important, the market itself has handed out very harsh punishment to some firms that had lost their credibility with investors and customers.
In principle, it seems to me that these actions should provide powerful incentives for virtually all market participants to maintain high standards.
Technological Change Technological change had become a pervasive influence on our lives long before I first spoke to this conference in 1998.
It continues to be so, and surely it will be a force for the foreseeable future.
Virtually all industries that have been profoundly affected, and financial services is no exception.
I have already mentioned the importance of technological change in improving risk measurement and management at financial institutions as a reason banks have weathered the recent economic downturn.
Moreover, I fully agree with the many observers who have highlighted the role of technology in breaking down traditional distinctions between commercial banking, investment banking, and insurance products.
In this sense, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act can be thought of as a response to technological change.
And, technological change can surely throw us some unexpected curves, as the successfully navigated but hugely expensive adjustments to deal with the century date change showed.
I will return in a few moments to the role of technological change in risk measurement and management and its influence on supervisory policy.
But first I want to spend a few moments discussing some interesting facets of the impact of change on the technologies used by American households to consume financial services.
The process by which technological change becomes embedded in production and consumption has long absorbed the attention of economists.
Despite this interest, the process remains a considerable mystery, and households' use of financial services is no exception.
For example, many academics, regulators, and bankers have for many years forecast that technological change would end use of the paper check and make the brick-and-mortar bank branch obsolete.
However, here we are in October 2003 and the paper check is still very much in use, the smart card has not succeeded as predicted, and the number of brick-and-mortar bank offices is still increasing.
Clearly, there is much that we do not understand.
I am not here today to propose any definite answers to the question of why households adopt new technologies in financial services more slowly than we sometimes predict.
But I would like to present a few facts that we have gathered over time in our triannual Survey of Consumer Finances that shed some light on this complex topic.
In 1995, we began asking households about their use of computers to conduct business with their financial institutions.
In that year, barely 4 percent of households with a checking account said they used a computer to consume financial services.
By 1998, the year of the next survey, the percentage saying they used a computer had risen to more than 6 percent.
In contrast, in 1995 the most common technology used by households for interacting with a financial institution was, by a wide margin, the in-person visit to an office.
In that year, 87 percent of households said they used this technology.
By 1998 the percentage of households using in-person visits had declined to 80 percent, but this was still by far the most common form of access.
Still, the data for 1995 and 1998 suggested change was beginning to occur, and the data for 2001 confirmed that trend.
In the 2001 survey, the percentage of households with a checking account that said they used the computer to consume financial services jumped dramatically to almost 20 percent.
However, use of the most common technology, the in-person visit, declined only modestly, to 78 percent.
While one cannot draw any strong conclusions from this small number of facts, they support the view that, in matters of finance, households tend to adopt technological change only gradually.
In addition, even when new technologies start to gain more widespread acceptance, old technologies are abandoned rather slowly and many users perhaps view the old and new technologies more as complements than as substitutes.
Research conducted by the Federal Reserve Board's staff reinforces the notion that the adoption of technological change is a highly complex process.
For example, it appears that income, education, age, and other factors, perhaps even a household's attitudes toward risk, play important roles in determining a household's willingness to adopt new technologies for the consumption of financial services.
On balance, I would suggest that strategic planners at financial institutions will need to take a wide variety of factors into account in planning and marketing technological innovations.
Risk Measurement and Management and the Implications for Supervisory Policy In the final section of my remarks to you five years ago, I emphasized the need for the Federal Reserve to continually improve the bank supervisory process to ensure that banks adequately manage the risks that could be introduced into the financial system by changes occurring in the financial sector.
I have no doubt that this statement remains valid today, although the risk management challenges facing banks have certainly evolved.
For example, our experiences with the market disruptions that followed the Russian default and the Asian debt crisis, and the growing importance of financial markets in the risk management processes of both financial and nonfinancial firms have helped to accentuate the importance of market liquidity.
Another significant adjustment in our supervisory emphasis is our ongoing effort to revise the Basel Capital Accord.
Today, I can give you only a taste of what we are trying to do, but over the past five years, bank supervisors in the United States and other nations have devoted a truly impressive amount of resources to developing a new set of international capital standards.
Indeed, in early August of this year the Federal Reserve and the other U.S. bank regulators released some very specific proposals for public comment.
The comment period ends in early November.
After assessing these comments together with those already received by the Basel Committee, the U.S. banking agencies will seek appropriate changes in the proposals.
The need for Basel II, as the proposed revised accord is called, arises because modern risk measurement and management practices, including the increasing ability to securitize assets, have made Basel I increasingly out-of-date, or should I just say, increasingly irrelevant, for our largest and most complex banking organizations.
For example, the Basel I capital standards have only four risk categories, and most loans receive the same regulatory capital charge even though loans made by banks encompass a wide spectrum of credit quality.
The highly limited differentiation among risks means that regulatory capital ratios are too often uninformative and might well provide misleading information regarding banks with risky or problem credits or, for that matter, with portfolios dominated by very safe loans.
Importantly, banks own internal capital models increasingly differentiate risks much more finely than do regulatory capital standards.
Another problem with Basel I is that its overly simplistic risk measures, when combined with advances in financial engineering technologies and improved risk measurement and management practices, have given banks the incentive and the means to game the system through so-called regulatory capital arbitrage.
Regulatory capital arbitrage is the avoidance of regulatory capital charges through the sale or securitization of bank assets for which the capital requirement that the market would impose is less than the current regulatory capital charge.
For example, low-risk residential mortgages are often securitized rather than held on a bank's books in part because the market requires less capital than does Basel I.
This behavior is perfectly understandable, even desirable, in terms of improving economic efficiency.
But it means that banks engaging in such arbitrage retain the higher-risk assets for which the regulatory capital charge, calibrated to assets of average quality, is on average too low.
The Basel II capital standards seek to improve regulatory capital standards via three broad and interrelated strategies, or "pillars."
The most important pillar, Pillar 1, consists of minimum capital requirements.
These requirements are rules by which a bank calculates its minimum capital ratio and by which its supervisor assesses whether the bank complies with the minimum capital threshold.
As under Basel I, a bank's risk-based capital ratio under Basel II would have a numerator representing the capital available to the bank, and a denominator that would be a measure of the risks faced by the bank, referred to as "risk-weighted assets."
What would be radically different is the definition of risk-weighted assets.
Under our proposals, the most advanced banks would use modern risk-management techniques, subject to validation by supervisors, to compute the risks in their on- and off-balance-sheet portfolios.
These procedures would more closely align regulatory capital requirements with the underlying economic risks of a banking organization.
As a result, the safety and soundness and the efficiency of the banking and financial system should be greatly improved.
Pillar 2 explicitly addresses supervisory oversight.
It embodies the concept that a well-managed bank should seek to go beyond simple compliance with minimum capital requirements to assess whether it has sufficient capital to support its risks.
In addition, on the basis of their knowledge of best industry practices at a range of institutions, supervisors would provide constructive feedback to bank managers on their bank's capital adequacy and its risk measurement and management practices.
Lastly, Pillar 3 seeks to complement Pillars 1 and 2 by encouraging stronger market discipline of banking organizations.
An important element here is requiring a bank to publicly disclose key measures related to its risk and capital positions.
Such disclosures should help uninsured creditors of a bank more accurately assess the risks of investing in the uninsured liabilities of the bank, including taking the opposite side of financial derivatives transactions.
Conclusion In closing, I want to thank you again for inviting me to speak to you.

The educational possibilities presented by the Adventure are truly exciting.
The Federal Reserve System has a long history of involvement in economic education.
An understanding of economic principles, especially the workings of markets, is fundamental to good decisionmaking--whether by workers, or employers, or public policymakers.
I also confess to some self-interest in this regard.
A better understanding of economics by the public makes the task of the Federal Reserve System easier.
People may disagree with our policies--some may have different objectives and others may think different approaches to achieving those objectives would be more effective--but at least we are speaking the same language.
They know what we are trying to do, and they know why.
Historically, much of our education effort has focused on increasing public understanding of the Federal Reserve System itself: how we are structured, the nature and scope of our mission, the monetary policy and supervisory tools at our disposal.
Providing information about the Fed remains a key part of our programs.
For the past ten or so years, we have been running the Fed Challenge, a competition in which teams of high school students engage in mock Federal Open Market Committee discussions and make recommendations regarding monetary policy.
The quality of the analysis and the sophistication of the presentations have been impressive.
By comparison, our own FOMC deliberations seem a little dry; for example, we on the FOMC tend to be a little more low tech than the students, who come armed with very colorful computer-driven graphics to support their analysis and arguments.
But teaching general economic principles has also been a recurring theme.
A number of Federal Reserve Banks work closely with the National Council on Economic Education (NCEE), which has a host of fascinating programs that make teaching and learning economics fun.
Gary Stern, the President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, currently chairs the NCEE, and I was privileged to address that group in May, 2002.
In recent years, the Federal Reserve has increased its attention to financial literacy, an area that might be seen as the more practical, personal side of economic education.
This increased emphasis reflects changes both in financial markets and in the consumer population.
The number of financial products and financial service providers has grown dramatically.
A widening array of financial choices offers the potential for great benefits to the public, but also poses temptations.
More and more people are gaining access to credit; indeed, a host of lenders is probably inundating them with solicitations.
The public can also select from a wide variety of savings vehicles, each with its special features.
Ideally, the result of this increase in choice is lower costs and products that more closely match consumer needs.
But some consumers are not prepared to confront this array of choices.
They lack the financial knowledge to evaluate the alternatives and to see future consequences.
They may be too trusting of lenders that present a friendly face and promise quick and easy access to funds, and too suspicious of those that are more deliberative but offer much better deals.
Newcomers to this country and populations who were previously denied access to credit markets particularly need assistance in coping with the increasingly complex financial system.
The Federal Reserve System recently launched a financial literacy campaign that includes a public-service announcement by Chairman Greenspan.
We have developed a Personal Financial Education web site that contains links to a large number of national, state, and local consumer education resources.1 On that site one can find information on such topics as on-line banking, how to buy a home, and accessing credit reports.
Individual Reserve Banks have also developed complementary web sites that include resources specific to their Districts.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's video and booklet on identity theft are among the highlights of the System's financial education offerings.
The booklet, in particular, is a best seller.
The New England Economic Adventure continues this rich tradition and also breaks new ground.
The Adventure, together with the auxiliary lessons and web materials, teaches important economic principles.
In particular, it emphasizes the central role of productivity growth in raising standards of living and illustrates what goes into such growth.
This is an especially timely lesson right now.
As you may know, over most of the past ten years U.S. productivity growth has been about double that of the previous twenty years.
Over the long term, productivity growth is the key to economic advancement.
By way of illustration, the pickup in productivity growth from an average of just under 1-1/2 percent from 1973 to 1995 to about 2-3/4 percent from 1995 to 2002, if maintained, suggests that living standards could double in twenty-five years rather than fifty years at the lower rate.
Thus, the rate of productivity growth in an economy is not just an ivory tower concept.
It translates into improvements in people's well-being over the long term.
Understanding how such growth occurs--and having some fun doing it--is what the Adventure is all about.
In the short-run, when productivity is growing more rapidly, aggregate demand must also increase more quickly, in order to prevent economic slack from increasing.
Over the last several quarters, demand has not been expanding as quickly as the economy's productive capacity, and the result has been the marked lack of job growth.
But as demand accelerates, job growth should improve also.
Finally, while I would like to think that all of the Federal Reserve System's economic education and financial literacy initiatives are lively and engaging, I suspect that the New England Economic Adventure will have special appeal.
To many people history has a stronger allure than economics.
New England has a particularly fascinating history and provides rich illustrations of economic decisionmaking.
Meanwhile, the computer-based interactive investment games link visitors to historical events, providing dramatic tension as well as fun.

