In recent years, the RMA has been at the forefront of efforts to strengthen risk management within the banking sector and has done excellent work fostering discussions of emerging best practices.
The RMA has also provided valuable input to another effort that is intimately connected with improvements in bank risk management--Basel II.
Today, I intend to provide you with my candid perspective on the Basel II effort, its current status, and where it is headed.
It is important that each of us with a stake in the outcome of Basel II consider it seriously and realistically; I intend to contribute today to such a discussion.
I want to first present some of the premises on which I have based my own involvement in the Basel II effort and then turn to the process that we see unfolding in the United States.
I will also address some of the concerns that have been raised regarding whether the U.S. approach to Basel II is overly limited in scope.
Starting Points Let me begin with a now-familiar argument: The need for Basel II arises because our current capital framework, Basel I, is deficient for our larger banks, particularly for our largest, most complex banks.
The familiarity of this argument does not lessen its force.
As you know, the purpose of a risk-based regulatory regime for capital adequacy is to define a minimum cushion for banks to ensure their safety and soundness and to provide a benchmark by which the financial condition of banks can be measured.
The risk-based ratios seek to compare available capital to a measure of the risks taken on.
We see today that the largest, most complex banks operate their businesses and conduct risk management in a manner that is substantially different from the method by which they calculate regulatory capital.
This difference reduces the usefulness and meaningfulness of regulatory capital ratios and places a burden on banks that must reconcile their risk-management and regulatory capital approaches.
In addition, we must consider that material weakness, let alone failure, among the larger, more-complex banks in the United States could pose a significant challenge for our economy and could generate substantial costs.
Effective supervision and regulation and other policies that promote a strong banking sector are in the best interests of us all.
For these reasons, policymakers and others with a similar perspective should care deeply that our risk-based capital rules provide a meaningful and comprehensive measure of the risks to which the largest banks in our society are exposed.
The significant gap between current capital ratios and the banks' own measures of risk is widening, and in my view, that justifies the need for modifying the capital regime used by our largest, most complex banks.
I believe the U.S. regulatory community is in agreement that Basel I as currently applied in the United States is no longer an appropriate system for these banks.
Therefore, we have realized that we need to provide our largest banks with a substantially different system for regulatory capital going forward.
Frankly, there appears to be no significant disagreement with this premise.
But, of course, the realization that Basel I needs to be overhauled to better address our largest, most complex banks does not itself dictate the form of that restructuring.
This is the subject of the second premise, which is that the most promising and, one could argue, only realistic possibility for construction of a Basel II is to use a framework that builds on the modern techniques of corporate finance and risk management and applies them across banks in a broadly similar fashion.
There is not much disagreement with the assertion that Basel II should be built on modern techniques of risk management.
Clearly, the incorporation of such techniques at some level seems to be a necessary condition if the goal is a risk-based capital framework that produces a meaningful, comprehensive measure of risk relative to capital.
However, not all would agree with the approaches that the Basel Committee has chosen in particular areas or, perhaps more fundamentally, with the nature of the balance between flexibility and comparability that is incorporated into Basel II.
For the moment, let me focus on the latter point, the balance between flexibility and comparability.
Some would argue that Basel II should permit banks the flexibility to measure risks precisely as they do internally or that it should allow banks to assess their own minimum capital requirement, subject to various tests and penalties for mis-estimation.
While one can perfectly well understand the motivation behind these sentiments, most do not view them as realistic.
In a moment, I will talk about the need for us to take seriously the competitive equity issues associated with Basel II.
But those competitive equity issues are also relevant here because, given the current and prospective state of technology in banking, a regime that would give the largest banks the flexibility to set their own capital requirements could not satisfy the need for competitive equity.
Similarly, a balanced assessment of the state of credit risk modeling and internal ratings approaches leads me to think that a full models regime could not in the near future produce measures of risk sufficiently comparable for a regulatory capital standard.
The tradeoff that is at the heart of Basel II is the tradeoff between flexibility and comparability.
Allowing banks to calculate regulatory capital in any manner that they see fit would certainly maximize the flexibility of such calculations, but the results would not be comparable across banks and thus the value of the capital standard would be compromised.
On the other hand, to focus too rigidly on comparability would require an approach that made no use whatsoever of internal measures of risk or allowed no differences of technique across banks.
Such an approach would not be sufficiently flexible and would prevent us from measuring risk as sensitively as necessary.
It would inevitably not be much different than the Basel I standard we have today.
The current Basel II proposals are a balancing act.
That is their strength and their vulnerability.
In seeking to produce a balance between the virtues of flexibility and comparability, the proposals introduce more complexity than some would prefer to see.
Yet, although we could debate at length the optimal proportions of flexibility and comparability in the different areas of the proposals, there is not a realistic alternative to the need to strike some balance between these two extremes.
The proposed framework builds on modern corporate finance and risk-management techniques; it gives banks some flexibility to develop their own internal assessments of risk but also constrains their assessments in various ways to ensure a greater degree of comparability.
We have not so far been presented with any realistic alternative to this proposed framework that would not in conceptual terms look a great deal like Basel II.
Having elaborated on these two premises--that Basel I is no longer adequate for our largest banks and that the structural concept of Basel II is the only realistic alternative to Basel I--let me now turn to a discussion of the path forward.
Process Going Forward The Basel Committee is planning to release by early May a third version of its proposals for comment.
This third consultative paper--CP3 for short--will contain some modifications resulting from the committee's recent quantitative impact survey, but it will be broadly similar to the proposals that banks in this country and around the world tested in that survey last fall.
The U.S. federal banking agencies are working hard to develop an advance notice of proposed rulemaking, or ANPR, that will explain concretely their vision of how Basel II would be implemented in the United States.
The ANPR will be tailored to the U.S. context in a way that particular banks will be able to see whether the proposal applies to them and what it will mean for them if it does.
The ANPR will also seek to pose questions in several areas in which the U.S. agencies need specific feedback.
We hope to issue the ANPR by the end of June.
The next stage in the process will be the feedback that we receive from you and other interested parties, both on the CP3 and especially on the ANPR in the United States.
The federal banking agencies will consider these comments very carefully.
I should be very clear about this.
Some believe that with the issuance of CP3, the shape of Basel II is essentially set in stone.
This is wrong.
If the CP3 or ANPR comments show that elements of the proposal need to be modified, the U.S. agencies will seek such modifications.
These views do not conflict at all with those that I elaborated a few minutes ago.
As I indicated, there is a well-understood need for a Basel II and any realistic version of it will need to balance flexibility and comparability in the use of modern risk-management techniques.
But the members of the Basel Committee need to remain open to the possibility of specific improvements to the proposals.
Let me describe some of the conceptual issues that have been raised regarding the proposals and provide some perspective on them.
First and foremost has been the issue of complexity.
Concern over this issue appears to have several aspects.
The first is a concern over the sheer volume of the proposals.
This aspect of the complexity concern is, I think, somewhat misguided because it has typically equated the Basel proposals with the sum total of those background papers that have been released in an effort to explain more transparently not only what the proposals are but why they look the way they do.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the Basel II proposals themselves are several times longer than Basel I.
One reason for this is that Basel II contains several different versions--it is no longer a one-size-fits-all approach.
But in the United States, we are not proposing to implement every flavor of Basel II.
The ANPR should therefore present a reasonably streamlined package for U.S. banks to consider.
Needless to say, it will also be imperative that the U.S. agencies explain the proposals as clearly as possible in the ANPR itself.
Another aspect of the complexity concern surrounding Basel II is its use of modern risk-management techniques.
These techniques inevitably involve complex statistical, and thus mathematical, assessments of risk.
To reject such techniques solely because they involve mathematical complexity would be inconsistent with the broader direction that banking and its best-practice risk management have been taking over the past decade.
One could not reasonably hope to develop a meaningful or comprehensive assessment of risk at a large, complex bank today without making use of such methods; and, I might add, this view seems to be supported by most of the documents issued on the matter by the RMA.
But some of the concern over complexity is driven by the fact that Basel II makes a number of distinctions between exposures and transactions in an effort to improve the risk sensitivity of the resulting capital ratios.
Reasonable people might disagree about these particular tradeoffs between complexity and risk-sensitivity that have been chosen by the Basel Committee.
Comments and feedback on these tradeoffs will be particularly important.
But such comments will be most effective if they address both sides of the question--not only point out areas in which the proposal may be overly complex but also show how the objective of risk sensitivity could be met in less complex ways or state why it may not be necessary to achieve either flexibility or greater risk sensitivity in this particular instance.
Competitive equity is a second fundamental area that I hope the comment process will address.
The question of competitive equity has domestic aspects, international aspects, and bank-nonbank aspects.
Let me start with this last aspect, namely whether the Basel II proposals will impose restraints on banks that are not being imposed on their nonbank competitors.
It is important that we receive information on the competitive impact of the Basel II proposals relative to nonbank competitors, particularly if it appears that the marketplace allows nonbanks to operate with less capital--or conversely with more leverage--than similarly situated banks would be required to hold.
Clearly, we should not hinder the competitive position of any U.S. banking organization relative to nonbanks and will work to avoid such an outcome.
However, bank supervisors also have an obligation to develop the regulations that they feel are appropriate to banks even if similar regulations will not be applied to nonbank competitors.
All of you are thoroughly familiar with the elements of the federal safety net--including deposit insurance and access to the discount window and the payment system--that differentiate banks from nonbanks in the United States.
The safety net, which is provided at taxpayer expense, obligates supervisors to develop approaches that they believe are prudent for the banks that benefit from that safety net.
A second aspect of the competitive equity issue involves domestic competition among banks--what would be the competitive effect of altering the regulatory capital rules for the largest and most complex banks while keeping the existing framework for most other banks?
My perception is that pricing, and thus competition, between large and smaller banks today is relatively little influenced by regulatory capital constraints because banks are operating far above regulatory minimum levels, or because economic capital and not regulatory capital is the binding constraint, or because banks are capable of easily selling or securitizing the exposure, as is the case with the majority of residential mortgage loans.
Moreover, the ultimate check on the possibility of competitive distortion is that any bank that makes the investment in risk management technology necessary to meet the Basel II standards will be able to adopt the advanced IRB approach.
I hope that it goes without saying that in proposing to implement Basel II as we have outlined, we are not seeking or expecting to induce material shifts in the competitive banking landscape in the United States.
Nevertheless, if some institutions believe that these proposals will have such an effect, we want them to use the ANPR comment process to enable us to understand and evaluate the rationale for those views and whether modifications to the Basel II proposals, or the way we intend to implement them, are appropriate in response.
Another important aspect of the competitive equity issue is competition among the subset of banks covered by the Basel II approaches, particularly the more advanced approaches.
As a result of relying on inputs generated by systems at individual banks, there will inherently be variations across these banks in how such systems treat the same transactions and exposures.
A certain amount of such variation is clearly a necessary byproduct of the need to provide the flexibility to make use of internally generated data.
But there is also a strong policy interest in ensuring comparability across banks, as I have already discussed.
This policy interest is one reason why it is desirable to establish minimum qualifying criteria for the use of approaches that rely on internally generated data, whether they might be the Advanced IRB approach for credit risk or the Advanced Measurement Approach (AMA) for operational risk.
On the other hand, we do not want these qualifying criteria to so constrict the development of internal methodologies that we end up stifling their creative evolution.
As I noted, the balance between flexibility and comparability is clearly a central issue in the design of a framework such as Basel II.
In considering the issues of competitive equity among banks operating on Basel II, the manner in which U.S. supervisors will evaluate compliance with the minimum qualifying criteria will not place banks in the United States at a disadvantage.
We have a track record of listening to banks and applying regulations and supervisory guidance in a manner that is sensible and focuses on priorities.
In the coming months, U.S. supervisors will be releasing draft supervisory guidance describing the approach that we envision taking toward the assessment of internal ratings systems for key parts of the loan portfolio.
We will of course be greatly interested in industry feedback on this draft guidance.
By including specific qualifying criteria in the Basel II proposals, we help ensure that banks operating in other jurisdictions will develop their internal ratings systems in a broadly similar fashion and thereby advance the achievement of a level international playing field.
This seems particularly important if some countries have regimes that rely more on rules and less on on-site supervision.
That is, to achieve a level playing field with such rules-oriented regimes, we need to include in the rules for Basel II the elements that we in the United States would be looking for anyway as part of our supervisory oversight process.
In the comment process, it will be particularly helpful if banks and others can be explicit in focusing on where concerns about competitive equity across banks are sufficient to warrant a change in the minimum qualifying criteria or in other aspects of the proposals.
Basel II as an International Standard While on the subject of international competitive equity, let me now digress a bit to discuss some of the concerns that have been raised regarding whether the envisioned U.S. approach to Basel II truly reflects a commitment to an international capital standard.
This concern arose after the announcement that the U.S. agencies proposed to formally implement only the most advanced versions of the Basel II proposals and that these will only be mandatory for approximately ten internationally active banks.
We anticipate that another ten or so large banks will voluntarily choose to adopt Basel II because of its greater risk sensitivity.
Needless to say, the goal of developing compatible systems of bank capital regulation in different jurisdictions has great merit.
The global nature of many banking organizations requires them to consider the rules and regulations of a wide variety of jurisdictions, and so these organizations have a strong interest in common approaches.
More importantly, the United States fully supports the role of the Basel Committee in developing capital standards that are appropriate for countries around the world to apply to their banking systems.
But as the Basel II process has signaled, one framework can no longer address the needs of all types of banking organizations.
To meet this challenge, the Basel II proposals contained in CP3 will include three approaches to the measurement of credit risk as well as three approaches to the measurement of operational risk.
So why is the United States not proposing to implement the full range of these options and apply them to all U.S. banks?
In addressing this question, I will first explain why we propose to implement the advanced methods and how we see this working.
Then I will address why, for reasons perhaps unique to the United States, we do not believe introducing the other options is necessary here.
In the United States, we concluded that the greatest potential benefit of Basel II was found in the most advanced versions--the Advanced IRB for credit risk and the AMA for operational risk.
We concluded that if we as supervisors were going to make the effort required for Basel II, we would like to focus that effort on the most advanced versions.
Obviously, concentrating attention on the most advanced approaches could help reduce the complexity of Basel II as it is implemented in the United States.
Clearly, not all banks in the United States can or should use these approaches for the purpose of calculating their capital requirement.
So the question naturally arises: Which banks should meet the new requirement?
The size, complexity, and international activity of one particular set of U.S. banks makes it imperative that they move to the Basel II advanced approaches as quickly as possible.
It is also clear that there will be a significant number of voluntary adopters of Basel II in the United States.
Indeed, I believe that the majority of internationally active U.S. banks will be operating under Basel II soon after the initial implementation date, whether or not they are part of the mandatory set.
If, as we expect, about twenty U.S. banks adopt the Basel II approaches at the outset, they will account for approximately two-thirds of all U.S. banking assets.
In addition, those U.S. banks account for about 99 percent of all foreign assets held by the top fifty domestic U.S. banking organizations, with the ten mandatory banks themselves accounting for about 95 percent.
This approach to Basel II implementation is a commonsense, step-by-step approach that makes appropriate distinctions between banks on the basis of their size and the scope of their international activities.
It will not compromise the international level playing field.
But on the other hand, it will allow U.S. supervisors to retain stronger control over the process by which they approve banks for use of the new advanced standards, and will reduce the incentives for banks to "rush" the necessary implementation efforts.
Another aspect of the concerns that have been raised about the focus on advanced approaches relates to the desire for the "mutual recognition" of approaches used in different jurisdictions, so that the differences between home- and host-country capital regimes should be kept to a low level.
These home/host issues have already been the focus of discussions within the Basel Committee's Accord Implementation Group, and the discussions will no doubt continue throughout the Basel II implementation period.
The United States shares the interests of other countries in trying to ensure that domestic subsidiaries of foreign parents--either U.S. subsidiaries operating abroad or foreign ones operating in the United States--are not required to develop onerous additional procedures to comply with domestic rules.
Of course, in the United States and in many other countries, domestic subsidiaries of foreign banks cannot be treated substantially differently from domestic banks.
U.S. and foreign supervisors working together can develop approaches, some of them transitional, that will avoid undue burdens on either U.S. bank subsidiaries of foreign bank parents that are using alternative versions of Basel II in their home countries, in particular other flavors of the operational risk or IRB proposals, or on foreign subsidiaries of U.S. banks.
In this regard, we believe it will be necessary for U.S. supervisors to allow, in some cases, for the use of transitional measures where banks--either U.S. or foreign--will not have reliable data for some interval.
The second part of the question is why U.S. supervisors are not proposing to implement other options in the Basel II package such as the standardized approach to credit risk.
This does not mean that U.S. supervisors believe these approaches are flawed or inferior to the Basel I approach.
Indeed, they contain innovations that should lead to meaningful improvements in other countries where they will be implemented.
For the United States, however, a key factor is that our capital regulations not only embody the Basel I standard but also include various "prompt corrective action" features such as the leverage ratio and the use of well-capitalized thresholds for both the risk-based and the leverage standards.
In applying a leverage ratio and a well-capitalized standard, the United States is probably unique.
Moreover, virtually all of the U.S. banking system currently meets the well-capitalized standard.
This is presumably because of the fact that both market and supervisory attention increases as a U.S. bank falls below the well-capitalized thresholds, which is the essence of prompt corrective action.
We are therefore confident that even for those banks not adopting the advanced approaches of Basel II, we will have a capital regime that achieves a standard of prudence as great as Basel II.
In light of these specific U.S. circumstances, the cost-benefit tradeoff associated with implementing the other Basel II options here differs from the tradeoff in other countries.
Given the costs involved in adopting new approaches, and given that with our current regime the benefits are lower for our smaller banks, it seems best at this time to retain the current regulatory capital framework for most U.S. banks other than the large, complex internationally-active set I described.
In addition, for many of the same reasons, we believed that it would be inevitable that even if we proposed to implement the Basel II standardized approach, that we would need to retain the current standards for some set of banks.
Thus, implementation of the Basel II standardized approach would not involve the replacement of an existing option but would create an entirely new, third approach in the United States.
The U.S. supervisors were of the view that this could result in cherry-picking and, thus, that the added complexity would not be worth the additional benefits.
More to the point, given the high capital position these banks continue to retain as well as their virtual lack of direct competition with banks in other countries that will be adopting Basel II, it does not seem reasonable to impose the cost of changing systems on most of these banks.
Conclusions Now I would like to return to the main thread of my remarks and to provide some concluding thoughts on the way forward.
I have already stressed the importance of the Basel II ANPR and the associated comment process in the United States.
Complexity and competitive equity are two important themes for this comment process.
Undoubtedly other issues will also be the subject of significant feedback.
The issue of operational risk is by now surely familiar to most of you, so I will not belabor these points here.
The calibration of the overall framework as well as of particular subsections of the framework will also inevitably attract a great deal of comment and attention.
Such attention can likely improve the Basel II proposals.
My remarks today have tried to lay out what I see as the central policy choices and issues confronting U.S. supervisors as we evaluate the comments we receive on the ANPR.
I have tried to be open and candid about the tradeoffs that I believe are involved, some of which are clearly inherent in the nature of the Basel II effort itself.
We will surely not be able to please everybody in our attempt to strike the right balance between flexibility and comparability or between complexity and risk sensitivity.
Of course, as supervisors we are not expecting that the banking industry is going to stand up and applaud what remains, after all, a "regulatory requirement."
As a sage adviser opined to me recently, if we ever get to the point where all of the banks are too enthusiastic about Basel II, then clearly something must have gone awry from a prudential point of view.
But your feedback and comments on the Basel II ANPR will significantly shape the views of U.S. supervisors on how we go forward with these proposals.
In closing, I would like to return to the points I made at the outset.
Our most fundamental choice as policymakers is whether we are going to replace the Basel I framework for our largest, most complex banks with a framework that relies significantly on internally generated inputs in an effort to achieve significantly greater risk sensitivity.
Against the backdrop of the dynamic changes occurring in banking and risk management, we have little if any choice but to find something that improves substantially on Basel I for the largest and most-complex banks.
Yet the choices involved in developing a viable and realistic alternative to Basel I are manifold, and each one of them gives rise to arguments and counterarguments.
We are not going to make the perfect policy choice initially in every one of these detailed instances.
In many cases, moreover, the best choice may evolve over time.
If we are going to move to a capital standard built substantially around internally generated assessments of risk, we need to focus on the practical realities of that decision and leave behind some of the wishful thinking about what each of us believes a perfect capital framework would look like.
An initiative as important as Basel II is bound to change significantly over time.
Basel II contains the promise of a capital framework that will evolve with improvements and advancements in risk-management techniques.
As new methods and techniques become more common and well tested, the Basel II framework can and should embrace such advances.
The sooner we can gain practical hands-on experience with such a framework, the sooner we can begin to realize its full potential.
The Basel II proposals represent a truly significant step in the evolution of bank regulation.
They are important and deserve your most thoughtful consideration as the U.S. bank supervisors evaluate exactly how to proceed with them.

Without missing a beat, the President paused as he was returning to the Oval Office and replied, "Tell him he should pay them."
Ronald Reagan brought a lightness and benevolence to the serious business of the Oval Office that few have been able to match.
He had inherited a dysfunctional economy and dealt with global dangers, but his spirit never wavered.
Though such one-liners and anecdotes were indeed humorous, many also communicate politics or policy.
A classic was candidate Reagan's memorable quip during his 1980 campaign for the presidency: "A recession is when your neighbor loses his job.
A depression is when you lose yours.
And a recovery is when Jimmy Carter loses his."
I presume that former President Carter was not amused, but as a skilled politician himself, he could not but admire the wit.
My favorite anecdote, as I remember it, starts with Mikhail Gorbachev, accompanied by his usual coterie of underlings, reviewing the Soviet Union's military might parading by Lenin's tomb.
The phalanx of missiles, tanks, and troops was most impressive as it passed the reviewing stand.
Next in line came a straggle of disheveled civilians wholly out of step, a clearly dissonant note in an otherwise well-orchestrated performance.
This sight evoked major distress from a Gorbachev aide who pleaded forgiveness for allowing such riffraff to mar the meticulous show of Soviet military might.
"Do not be concerned, comrade," counseled Gorbachev.
"I am responsible for them.
They are our economists, and you have no idea how much damage they can do."
Underlying the humor is President Reagan's long-held distrust of those economists who promoted what he perceived as destructive government intervention in the marketplace.
Throughout his professional life, the President understood the self-correcting tendencies of free markets and the fundamental wealth-creating capacity of capitalism.
He trusted Adam Smith's invisible hand to stimulate creativity and innovation and to produce outcomes that he perceived as generally fair.
A great deal of what Reagan saw in the America of the 1970s was not to his liking, and he changed much of it when he became President.
Yet for all that he accomplished in those remarkable eight years, one could argue that he had an even greater effect after he left office, when a whole generation of people who were proud to be identified as Reaganites moved into positions to influence policy.
If he was ever discouraged, I suspect it was because not even Ronald Reagan could fully rein in excess government spending and significantly pare the size of the bureaucracy.
To be sure, no American President, with constitutionally limited powers, has been able to mold a nation as complex as the United States to his set of values.
But Ronald Reagan surely stands in the first rank of American Presidents measured by the breadth of their legacy for good.
In his eight years in office, President Reagan transformed the country's self-image.
Instead of believing they were a once great power, Americans regained their self-confidence, sensing that it was indeed "morning in America."
Although we have not yet wholly leveled the playing field, Ronald Reagan believed that, more than in any other country, every individual in the United States is given an opportunity to succeed.
The revival of the American spirit, which became evident in the 1980s, was the result not of the President's cheery disposition but rather of his implementation of important changes that continue to manifest themselves in our society and economy.
Ronald Reagan started the sequence of geopolitical initiatives that led Mr. Gorbachev to figuratively tear down the Berlin Wall.
President Reagan's rhetorical demand, as he stood at the Wall in 1987, is the most vivid image I have of his presidency.
He sensed a progressive economic rot in the Soviet Union, despite official appraisals from within the U.S. government of continuing Soviet economic strength.
He also did not believe, contrary to much conventional wisdom, that per capita gross domestic product in East Germany by the 1980s had drawn close to that of West Germany.
In fact, after the dismantling of the Berlin Wall, the figure was estimated to be less than half.
As a consequence, President Reagan was convinced that the economy of the Soviet bloc could not sustain the pace of its arms race with the United States.
A surprisingly large number of western economists, including many in our government, disagreed.
They were largely relying on an array of statistics from Soviet bloc central planning authorities that, in the light of freedom, turned out to be grossly exaggerated.
The President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board in 1984 gave me the task of evaluating economic data from the Soviet bloc and our intelligence estimates of the economic strength of the Soviet Union.
The data's quality was poor, and their implications were contradictory.
The President cut through the ambiguity with the simple premise that an authoritarian and corrupt government cannot foster economic vitality.
He had it right, though it was still years before his insight became evident to all.
* * * * * President Reagan applied the same straightforward approach to domestic economics, setting in motion several initiatives that facilitated an economic trend resulting in the exceptionally flexible U.S. economy that we observe today.
That increased flexibility has allowed us to absorb and, at least to date, fend off a series of economic shocks in the last three years that in an earlier period, in my judgment, would have been debilitating.
My predecessor at the Federal Reserve, Paul Volcker, embarked in the fall of 1979 on an aggressive monetary tightening that attempted to arrest a dangerously accumulating set of inflationary forces.
Presidential candidate Reagan also perceived inflation as a danger, and, then as President, afforded Volcker the political support that is so essential to a central bank when its pursuit of long-term stability risks some worsening in near-term economic activity.
That support began the process that has led today to the virtual elimination of inflation from the U.S. economy.
A second key support to today's flexible markets has been the bipartisan deregulation initiatives that began in the Ford and Carter years and were extended by Ronald Reagan.
In January 1981, disregarding warnings that the action might renew upward pressures on inflation, President Reagan dismantled the remaining controls that had debilitated our oil markets.
By 1986, crude oil prices had reached their lowest levels in real terms since 1973.
Deregulation in finance, trade, and transportation was pressed forward.
But perhaps the most important, and then highly controversial, domestic initiative was the firing of the air traffic controllers in August 1981.
The President invoked the law that striking government employees forfeit their jobs, an action that unsettled those who cynically believed no President would ever uphold that law.
President Reagan prevailed, as you know, but far more importantly his action gave weight to the legal right of private employers, previously not fully exercised, to use their own discretion to both hire and discharge workers.
There was great consternation among those who feared that an increased ability to lay off workers would raise the level of unemployment and amplify the sense of job insecurity.
It turned out that with greater freedom to fire, the risks of hiring declined.
This increased flexibility contributed to the ability of the economy to operate with both low unemployment and low inflation.
Whether the average level of job insecurity has risen is difficult to judge, but, if so, some offset to that concern should come from a diminished long-term average unemployment rate.
The notion that lowering barriers to discharging workers reduces the long-term unemployment rate has gained widespread acceptance even beyond our shores.
The European Council, meeting in Brussels last month, urged member states to "maintain the momentum of reform of national labor markets" by among other things, "relaxing overly restrictive elements that affect labor market dynamics."
That is not the way that Ronald Reagan would have put it, but analytically it is moving in a Reagan direction.
In a recent speech, Chancellor Schröder, a Democratic Socialist, made specific proposals to reduce the cost of hiring and firing German workers.
He proposed making protection against dismissal "less unwieldy."
* * * * * Ronald Reagan was one of our most successful Presidents in part because he fervently believed in, and acted on, a small number of important principles.
To be sure, he knew how to compromise to advance his legislative agenda.
But in the process he always kept sight of his essential principles.
Those principles included a wholehearted embrace of capitalism and a rule of law.
He understood that no market system--no exchange of goods and services--can function without a rule of law rooted in individual rights, especially the right to own property.
Indeed, societies that do not sanction and protect ownership rights are invariably rife with bribery, corruption, and violence.
Little wealth is created in such an environment.
A society riven with violence cannot organize a viable market economy.
It obviously cannot prosper if violence is unchecked, but it also cannot prosper if the amount of violence that has to be checked is large.
The high risk and cost of enforcement imposed on an economy subject to random violence will raise the cost of capital and inhibit productive economic growth.
The constancy of Reagan's policy goals helped his administration construct legislative and budgetary recommendations.
Most veteran Reagan staffers found that they could press their priorities by demonstrating their consistency with one or more of the President's goals.
That approach resulted in a greater coherence of policymaking.
Ironically, it also helped coalesce the opposition to his policies because the President's positions were a good deal less ambiguous than those of most other politicians.
Many disagreed with elements of Ronald Reagan's philosophy of freedom and markets, but few have had difficulty understanding where he stood on the question of how to organize an economy.
I will leave a fuller analysis of that philosophy to historians and biographers.
Instead, let me focus this evening on one pillar of free-market capitalism, the model that Reagan embraced so enthusiastically.
I refer to an old-fashioned human virtue--trust.
* * * * * Although a rule of law is necessary to a vibrant and efficient market economy, it is not sufficient.
We rarely consider, for example, that a law of contracts, an integral part of any rule of law, operates because everyone assumes that only a very small share of legally contracted transactions will require adjudication.
If it were otherwise, our courts would be overwhelmed, and our economy severely impaired.
Hence, an effective law of contracts, as part of a rule of law, requires that the vast majority of transactions be voluntary.
That outcome necessitates that the buyer of a good or service trust the explicit or implicit warranty on the offered product.
The buyer needs assurance that, if an agricultural equipment dealer certifies that a harvester is in mint condition, he is being truthful and his warranty is to be trusted.
Similarly, the dealer needs assurance that the buyer's check is good.
If trust in the word of counterparties is lost, any exchange that takes place will need to be administered by a court or some third party.
It is a costly use of real resources if one is required to engage in the memorable admonition of one great statesman in a different context, "Trust, but verify."
Trust in the promises and performances of counterparties to a trade is thus an essential pillar of free markets and, hence, free-market capitalism.
Because trust is so valued, it is often capitalized and recorded explicitly as "goodwill" on business balance sheets.
Our system works fundamentally on individual fair dealing.
We need only look around today's world to realize the rarity and value of such an underpinning.
Trust has had an important role in American economic development.
In fact, through much of the nineteenth century, laissez-faire reigned and caveat emptor was the prevailing prescription for guarding against the wide-open trading practices of those years.
A reputation for honest dealings was thus a particularly valued asset.
Even those inclined to be less than scrupulous in their private dealings were forced to adhere to a more ethical standard, or they risked being driven out of business.
To be sure, the history of business is strewn with Fisks, Goulds, and numerous others treading on, or over, the edge of legality.
But they were a distinct minority.
If it were otherwise, the United States at the end of the nineteenth century would never have been poised to displace Great Britain as the world's leading economy.
Reputation was especially important to early U.S. bankers.
It is not by chance that in the nineteenth century many bankers could effectively issue uncollateralized currency.
They worked hard to develop and maintain a reputation that their word was their bond.
For these institutions to succeed and prosper, people had to trust their promise of redemption in specie.
The notion that "wildcat banking" was rampant before the Civil War was an exaggeration.
Certainly, crooks existed in banking, as in every business.
Some banks that issued currency made redemption inconvenient, if not impossible.
But they were fly-by-night operators and rarely made it beyond the first swindle.
In fact, most bankers competed vigorously for reputation.
Those bankers who had a history of redeeming their bank notes in specie, at par, were able to issue substantial quantities of notes, effectively financing their balance sheets with zero-interest debt.
J.P. Morgan marshaled immense power on Wall Street in large part because his reputation for fulfilling his promises was exemplary.
But as the nineteenth century came to a close, the view that the federal government should eschew any role in altering free-market forces started to change.
The dishonest practices of some less-scrupulous business people seriously eroded the valuable reputations of the many more ethical business people.
The Granger laws of the 1870s began the process of regulating the marketing practices of the railroads.
But they were not very effective and were followed by the much broader Interstate Commerce Act of 1887.
The Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914 backed up the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890 by specifying illegal trading practices.
Caveat emptor was in retreat as federal enforcement of appropriate business practice had the collateral effect of diminishing the value of hard-earned private reputation.
Over the past half century, the American public has embraced the protections of the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the myriad other federal agencies that have largely substituted government financial guarantees and implied certifications of integrity for business reputation.
As a consequence, the market value of trust so prominent in the nineteenth century seemed, by the 1990s, to have faded to a fraction of its earlier level.
Perhaps we are better protected and, accordingly, better off as a consequence.
But corporate scandals of recent years have affirmed the view that the plethora of laws of the past century had not eliminated the less-savory side of human nature.
I anticipate that recent legislation holding chief executive officers more responsible for the integrity of their companies will help.
But I am pleased to see a re-emergence of market value placed on trust and personal reputation governing business practice.
Moreover, after the revelations of corporate malfeasance, the market punished the stock prices of those corporations whose past behaviors cast doubt on the reliability of their reputations.
I hope and anticipate that trust and integrity again will be amply rewarded in the marketplace as they were in earlier generations.
I cannot help but believe that Ronald Reagan would consider that the right outcome.
* * * * * Our forefathers bestowed upon us a system of government and a culture of enterprise that has propelled the United States to the greatest prosperity the world has ever known.
We elect Presidents to protect and expand that bequest.
Ronald Reagan will go down in history as one President who superbly fulfilled that obligation.
Contributing far more to that success than most realize was Nancy Reagan.
The critical importance of her loving support of her husband, especially in periods of great stress, was evident to all of us who had the privilege of serving the President.
And besides, she added a certain sparkle to the Reagan White House and to Washington that few of us can forget.
I particularly remember her bravura surprise performance to a standing ovation at the 1982 Gridiron Club dinner.
I do not know how many congressional votes she garnered for the Administration from that performance, but she certainly won mine.
The Reagan presidency was a remarkable one for Americans.

