Community banks--by that I mean commercial banks with assets less than $1 billion--earned $12.9 billion in 2003, based on preliminary Call Report data.
This figure translates into a return on assets of 1.18 percent and a return on equity of 11.55 percent.
Fourth-quarter returns were a bit below that, following a familiar seasonal pattern.
Overall, return on assets has been consistently between 1.10 percent and 1.20 percent and return on equity has been close to 12 percent.
Higher non-interest income--including mortgage origination and servicing income--and decreases in required provisioning allowed earnings to remain strong despite pressure on margins.
Only about 6 percent of community banks lost money for the year, representing less than 3 percent of their total assets.
Consolidation continued in the industry in 2003.
According to our preliminary figures, there were about 7,300 community banks at year-end 2003, some 140 fewer (1.9 percent) than a year earlier and about 500 (or 11 percent) fewer existed five years ago.
The consolidation in the industry, and the search for efficiency and scope, should not be misunderstood.
It does not signal a threat to the community banking franchise; far from it.
The market for community bank charters makes this point clear.
Seventy-seven new commercial bank charters were issued in the first nine months of 2003, and nearly five hundred since the beginning of 2000.
Over that same period, for every five banks that disappeared through consolidation, another two new charters were granted.
In total, that represents $2.4 billion in new equity capital invested in community bank charters.
Community bank net interest margins continue to be above those of the industry as a whole.
For 2003, the community bank margin was about 4.1 percent, nearly thirty-basis points higher than the comparable figure for the industry.
To some extent, this reflects a different business mix, despite the role of high-spread credit card lending at larger institutions.
A closer look at the Call Report shows that community banks seem to pay more for their nonmaturity deposits than do larger institutions.
The average effective rate paid at community banks in 2003 was just below 1.00 percent, some 25 basis points higher than the industry-wide figure of 0.74 percent.
Among other factors, this trend has contributed to narrowing margins over the last few years.
Credit quality has also improved at community banks, supporting higher earnings, although it had not deteriorated as significantly as the industry did as a whole.
Problem loans barely reached 1.00 percent of total loans in this credit cycle, compared with 1.27 percent for the industry as a whole.
By late 2003, however, community banks had a problem asset ratio roughly equal to that of the larger institutions, at about 0.90 percent.
Although there were many similarities, balance sheet developments at community banks in 2003 differed in many regards from those at larger institutions.
Community bank holdings of mortgage-related securities were largely unchanged from those at the end of 2002, and their closed-end mortgage loan holdings declined about 5 percent, while larger institutions experienced significant growth in both categories.
Commercial and industrial loans fell at community banks in both 2002 and 2003 but at a much slower rate of decline--less than half a percent in each year--than at larger institutions.
Capitalization is another area of contrast.
Strong capital ratios, well in excess of regulatory minimums, have been a key factor in managing credit concentrations and, indeed, a striking attribute of the most profitable community banks.
The top one-fifth of community banks, in terms of profitability, typically hold 1.6 percentage points more capital relative to assets than other community banks.
The most striking difference, however, is seen in loans for commercial real estate.
Commercial real estate lending--made up of construction lending; loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential properties; and multifamily housing--continued to grow rapidly in 2003.
The nominal growth in such loans at community banks--$29 billion--essentially accounted for all of the asset growth at these institutions, while amounting to only about one-seventh of asset growth for the industry as a whole.
By the end of 2003, this lending had reached 25.1 percent of aggregate community bank assets.
That is 7 percent higher than five years ago, and it has set a new record for community banks as the highest concentration in commercial real estate loans--yes, even higher than in the early 1990s.
This increase appears to be fairly widespread across the population of community banks, and it is evident at highly profitable and less-profitable institutions.
Commercial real estate lending is a traditional and natural part of the community banking franchise, and by all accounts underwriting practices continue to be much better than they were in the troubled days of the 1980s.
For these reasons, there is no indication at this time that the overall credit quality of commercial real estate exposures at community banks has deteriorated.
Moreover, market reports indicate the vacancy rates in some markets have turned around and are recovering.
That said, there are a number of markets nationwide that have experienced weakness in recent years and continue to do so.
Many of these markets are likely to take years to recover.
Bank directors and management--as well as supervisors--will need to closely monitor further developments in this area.
More generally, a critical "franchise" issue for community bankers has been recognizing and managing credit risk concentrations that also tend to be a natural part of the community banking business.
When credit quality problems emerge at an institution, they of course cause lower returns and attract more attention from your friendly bank supervisors.
The presence of lending concentrations indicates that such problems can develop more quickly and more broadly across a pool of borrowers.
Successful management of concentrations requires adherence to good credit fundamentals.
Important advances in the measurement and management of credit risk have been developed that community bankers should probably consider for their own use in the coming years.
There are no magic bullets here, but community bankers may find that these advanced techniques provide useful tools and concepts that can reinforce existing disciplines in the credit management process.
The near-term outlook for community bank profitability is good, but at this point prospects for the rate of earnings growth may be a bit less rosy than for larger institutions.
Paradoxically, there is probably little more room to lower credit costs for community banks, unlike at larger institutions with still-elevated levels of problem loans.
Provisions at community banks in 2003 were roughly 50 basis points of average loans, the lowest level seen at community banks since 1998 and a figure that would probably be considered "normal" and prudent over the longer term.
This leveling of loan-loss provisions accompanied by the cooling of fees from mortgage refinancings and originations will heighten attention on new opportunities for asset growth and higher-margin assets.
Most observers expect that business borrowers will soon resume more normal levels of borrowing activity.
Although their return may provide one avenue for earnings growth to banks of all sizes, it is important that the competitive drive to win borrowers is not allowed to overcome the discipline of prudent lending practice.
Directors and management should be particularly attentive to this possibility given the extended period of weak loan demand that we've recently experienced.
A natural temptation for a banker when facing pressures for earnings growth would be to extend maturities in search of more attractive rates of return.
I'd like to say a few cautionary words about this temptation.
With a steep yield curve, the portion of community bank assets maturing beyond five years has grown steadily since year-end 2000, from 16.9 percent to 18.4 percent of assets.
Larger institutions hold a greater share of their assets in long-term instruments and have also seen an increase in long-term assets over the same period.
They arguably may have better access to derivatives markets and more sophisticated programs for managing their interest rate risk.
Rather than resorting to the derivatives market--fewer than 600 commercial banks hold any derivatives contracts at all--most community bankers may simply choose to rely on the interest rate protection provided by their stable and reliable core deposit base.
They may believe this base to be more stable and reliable than at larger institutions, and from a historical point of view that belief might be difficult to dispute.
Community bankers depend on these deposits maintaining the stability and reliability they have exhibited in the past.
As a result, interest rate and liquidity management become even more closely intertwined.
Money market deposit accounts and savings deposits at community banks grew sharply in 2003, although they dropped slightly--less than $2 billion or 0.6 percent--in the fourth quarter.
A drop of this size hasn't taken place at community banks for some years, and has not occurred at all at the larger banks.
If our analysis is correct and deposit growth has been fueled by low interest rates and weakness in the equity markets, community bankers should be aware that they may face unexpected liquidity and interest rate pressures if their deposit customers shift their funds to other investment vehicles.
This is not idle speculation.
We need to remember that depositor behavior can change.
An excellent example is the high-interest rate period we experienced in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when long-term certificates of deposit were redeemed early--despite the significant penalties assessed--in order to lock in higher market rates.
The relative stability of these nonmaturity deposits and the liquidity they provide have been an important strength to community banks, although there have been too many instances in which rapidly growing banks have faced unexpected liquidity pressures because they relied more heavily on non-core or volatile funding sources.
Careful planning of growth and funding needs is a key aspect of sound management and requires the appropriate degree of management attention.
Conclusion The past year was a good year for the industry, one in which banks were able to adapt to a changing environment and still generate record profits.
Community banks once again demonstrated their value to the marketplace and the prominent and vibrant position they rightly occupy in the industry.
The industry is strong and resilient, but we should not gauge the industry's ability to withstand and adapt to challenges solely on the basis of what happened in 2003.
As we reflect on this banner year, it will serve us well to bear in mind that the credit and business challenges the industry faced in recent years were certainly not as difficult as they might have been--and indeed may yet be at some point in the future.
Asset quality certainly was an issue in this credit cycle, but never approached the levels experienced in the early 1990s.
Similarly, a low-interest rate environment, together with a steep yield curve, can provide a forgiving setting for bankers, at least in the near term.

A society without state protection of individual rights, especially the right to own property, would not build private long-term assets, a key ingredient of a growing modern economy.
Since its early stirrings in eighteenth-century Britain, modern economic development has been characterized by an ebb and flow in the intensity of state involvement in shaping the economic environment.
According to the legends of the early American West, the only law west of the Pecos River was administered by Judge Bean.
I am not sure how much law that was, but I do know that much protection of property in sparsely settled western communities just after the Civil War had to be privately provided.
Understandably, trade was limited in such an environment.
Economic growth was greatly facilitated by the emergence of civil government, which provided, among other things, consistent and predictable enforcement of property rights.
More recently, the states of the former Soviet Union suffered for a time many of the alleged characteristics of the American Wild West--legal chaos, rampant criminality, and widespread corruption.
This difficult period of transition in the Soviet satellite countries followed four decades of central planning in which the arbitrary enforcement of an inefficient set of rules resulted in massive economic failure.
With few exceptions, the new leaders of these countries recognize that their future economic success will depend on an efficient and predictable rule of law.
* * * A tension has always existed between a desired continuity in the laws and regulations governing trade and business practices and the necessary updating that is required to keep pace with a growing and, hence, changing economy.
Uncertainties that stem from the arbitrary enforcement of the body of prevailing rules result in higher risk and an associated elevation of the cost of capital, which in turn inhibits economic growth.
Implementing an effective rule of law, however, has its own difficulties.
One key component, a law of contracts, governs the resolution of certain disputes between parties.
Yet if adjudication were requested for more than a very small fraction of contracts, our court system would be swamped into immobility and the performance of our economy would suffer.
Thus, if our market system is to function smoothly, the vast majority of trades must rest on mutual trust and only indirectly on the law.
A more general concern is that laws can never be fixed in perpetuity.
As societies and economies evolve, the details of the law, though generally not its fundamental principles, need to change.
But any uncertainty about the clarity and fixity of the law adds to the risk of trade, which as I noted, is reflected in a higher real cost of capital.
We in the United States endeavored to lessen legal uncertainty by embedding our most fundamental principles in a constitution, which we made difficult to amend.
The commercially and economically salient specifics are typically expressed in federal or state statutes.
In general, this arrangement seems to have provided us with a healthy balance of continuity and predictability and, yet, also the requisite flexibility to respond to evolving economic and societal circumstances.
* * * Reflecting that flexibility, the direction and the emphasis of legislative revision over the generations have mirrored the changing structure of our economy.
In recent decades, for example, the fraction of the total output of our economy that is essentially conceptual rather than physical has been rising.
This trend has, of necessity, shifted the emphasis in asset valuation from physical property to intellectual property and to the legal rights inherent in intellectual property.
Though the shift may appear glacial, its impact on legal and economic risk is beginning to be felt.
Over the past half-century, the increase in the value of raw materials has accounted for only a fraction of the overall growth of U.S. gross domestic product (GDP).
The rest of that growth reflects the embodiment of ideas in products and services that consumers value.
This shift of emphasis from physical materials to ideas as the core of value creation appears to have accelerated in recent decades.
Technological advance is continually altering the shape and nature of our economic processes and, in particular, is promoting the trend toward increasing conceptualization of U.S. GDP.
The size of our radios, for example, has been dramatically reduced by the substitution of transistors for vacuum tubes.
Thin fiber optic cable has replaced huge tonnages of copper wire.
New architectural, engineering, and materials technologies have enabled the construction of buildings enclosing the same space with far less physical material than was required, say, 50 or 100 years ago.
More recently, mobile phones have markedly downsized as they have improved.
The movement over the decades toward production of services requiring little physical input has also been a major contributor to the marked rise in the ratio of constant dollars of GDP to ton of input.
This dramatic shift toward product downsizing during the past half-century stems from several causes.
The challenge of accumulating physical goods and moving them in an ever more crowded geographical environment has clearly resulted in cost pressures to economize on size and space.
Similarly, the prospect of increasing costs of discovering, developing, and processing ever-larger quantities of physical resources has shifted producers toward downsized alternatives.
This shift appears effectively to have answered the dire concerns that were expressed, in a report from the Club of Rome three decades ago, about the prospects of running out of the physical resources that allegedly were necessary to support our standards of living.
Another cause of product downsizing is that, as we moved the technological frontier forward and pressed for information processing to speed up, the laws of physics required the relevant microchips to become ever more compact.
More generally, in the realm of physical production, where scarce resources are critical inputs, each additional unit of output is usually more costly to produce than the previous one; that is, production, at least eventually, is characterized by increasing marginal cost.
By contrast, in the realm of conceptual output, much of production is characterized by constant, and perhaps even zero, marginal cost.
For example, though the set-up cost of creating an on-line encyclopedia may be enormous, the cost of reproduction and distribution may be near zero if the means of distribution is the Internet.
The emergence of an electronic platform for the transmission of ideas at negligible marginal cost may, therefore, be an important factor explaining the recent increased conceptualization of the GDP.
The demand for conceptual products is clearly impeded to a much smaller degree by rising marginal cost than is the demand for physical products.
But regardless of its causes, conceptualization is irreversibly increasing the emphasis on the protection of intellectual, relative to physical, property rights.
Before World War I, markets in this country were essentially uninhibited by government regulations, but they were supported by rights to property, which in those years largely meant physical property.
Intellectual property--patents, copyrights, and trademarks--represented a far less important component of the economy, which was mainly agricultural.
One of the most significant inventions of the nineteenth century was the cotton gin.
Perhaps it was a harbinger of things to come that the intellectual-property content of the cotton gin was never effectively protected from copiers.
Only in recent decades, as the economic product of the United States has become so predominantly conceptual, have issues related to the protection of intellectual property rights come to be seen as significant sources of legal and business uncertainty.
In part, this uncertainty derives from the fact that intellectual property is importantly different from physical property.
Because they have a material existence, physical assets are more capable of being defended by police, the militia, or private mercenaries.
By contrast, intellectual property can be stolen by an act as simple as broadcasting an idea without the permission of the originator.
Moreover, one individual's use of an idea does not make that idea unavailable to others for their own simultaneous use.
Even more importantly, new ideas--the building blocks of intellectual property--almost invariably build on old ideas in ways that are difficult or impossible to trace.
From an economic perspective, this provides a rationale for making calculus, developed initially by Leibnitz and Newton, freely available, despite the fact that those insights have immeasurably increased wealth over the generations.
Should we have protected their claim in the same way that we do for owners of land?
Or should the law make their insights more freely available to those who would build on them, with the aim of maximizing the wealth of the society as a whole?
Are all property rights inalienable, or must they conform to a reality that conditions them?
These questions bedevil economists and jurists, for they touch on some fundamental principles governing the organization of a modern economy and, hence, its society.
Whether we protect intellectual property as an inalienable right or as a privilege vouchsafed by the sovereign, such protection inevitably entails making some choices that have crucial implications for the balance we strike between the interests of those who innovate and those who would benefit from innovation.
In the case of physical property, we take it for granted that the ownership right should have the potential of persisting as long as the physical object itself.
In the case of an idea, however, we have chosen to strike a different balance in recognition of the chaos that could follow from having to trace back all the thoughts implicit in one's current undertaking and pay a royalty to the originator of each one.
So rather than adopting that principled but obviously unworkable approach, we have chosen instead to follow the lead of British common law and place time limits on intellectual property rights.
It is, thus, no surprise that, as a result of the increasing conceptualization of our GDP over the decades, the protection of intellectual property has become an important element in the ongoing deliberations of both economists and jurists.
Of particular current relevance to our economy overall is the application of property right protection to information technology.
A noticeable component of the surge in the trend growth of the economy in recent years arguably reflects the benefits that we have derived from the synergy of laser and fiber optic technologies in the 1960s and 1970s.
This synergy has produced very little that is tangible in information technology.
Yet the information flow that it facilitates has fostered the creation of vast amounts of wealth.
The dramatic gains in information technology have markedly improved the ability of businesses to identify and address incipient economic imbalances before they inflict significant damage.
These gains reflect new advances in both the physical and the conceptual realms.
It is imperative to find the appropriate intellectual property regime for each.
* * * If our objective is to maximize economic growth, are we striking the right balance in our protection of intellectual property rights?
Are the protections sufficiently broad to encourage innovation but not so broad as to shut down follow-on innovation?
Are such protections so vague that they produce uncertainties that raise risk premiums and the cost of capital?
How appropriate is our current system--developed for a world in which physical assets predominated--for an economy in which value increasingly is embodied in ideas rather than tangible capital?
The importance of such questions is perhaps most readily appreciated here in Silicon Valley.
Rationalizing the differences between intellectual property rights as defined and enforced in the United States and those of our trading partners has emerged as a seminal issue in our trade negotiations.
If the form of protection afforded to intellectual property rights affects economic growth, it must do so by increasing the underlying pace of output per labor hour, our measure of productivity growth.
Ideas are at the center of productivity growth.
Multifactor productivity by definition attempts to capture product innovations and insights in the way that capital and labor are organized to produce output.
Ideas are also embodied directly in the capital that we employ.
In essence, the growth of productivity attributable to factors other than indigenous natural resources and labor skill, is largely a measure of the contribution of ideas to economic growth and to our standards of living.
Understanding the interplay of ideas and economic growth should be an area of active economic analysis, which for so many generations has focused mainly on physical things.
This work will not be easy.

