Our agenda is filled with addresses by distinguished speakers and research papers of uniformly high quality on topics of keen interest to central bankers.
Indeed, few subjects are more important for central bankers than the efficiency and stability of the financial system.
Many of the papers to be presented and discussed over the next two days focus on the behavior of private institutions operating in financial markets.
I thought I could complement these presentations by discussing the efforts of an important class of public institutions--central banks--to foster efficiency and stability in the financial system.
Before proceeding, I should note that my remarks today represent my own views, which are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board or on the Federal Open Market Committee.
In previous discussions, I have found it useful to offer a working definition of financial instability that seems most relevant from a public-policy perspective.
Although difficult to define precisely, financial instability, in my view, connotes the presence of market imperfections or externalities in the financial system that are substantial enough to create significant risks for real aggregate economic performance.
Over the past few decades, economic research has identified a variety of imperfections inherent in markets, such as moral hazard, asymmetric information, and externalities.
On occasion, these imperfections can become so widespread and significant as to result in outcomes that threaten the functioning of the financial system and adversely affect real economic variables.
History suggests that these imperfections reach this advanced and disruptive stage when they are exacerbated by large external shocks.
Such outcomes include panics, bank runs, severe market illiquidity, and excessive risk aversion.
These outcomes are highly undesirable for society because they can be accompanied by a variety of economic distortions: Financial prices can diverge sharply and for prolonged periods from fundamentals, and their correction is likely to impose great cost on society; the availability and pricing of credit may be too lax at times and at other times too restrictive relative to underlying macroeconomic conditions.
As a result of these distortions, spending and real activity may undergo much wider swings than would otherwise be the case.
I would hasten to add, however, that this definition of financial instability does not encompass failures of financial firms due to poor management or poor luck; nor does it include fluctuations in asset prices or credit conditions as a consequence of the normal evolution of economic circumstances, nor occasional substantial losses of individual counterparties.
Indeed, such failures and losses, as well as accompanying market volatility, are the unavoidable and even necessary features of dynamic market economies.
In my view, market volatility and institutional stresses need to be addressed by public-policy action only when they are symptomatic of, and interact with, more-fundamental market failures that have a high likelihood of impairing real macroeconomic performance.
Indeed, public policies that rely too heavily on regulation of financial institutions, instruments, and markets with the aim of avoiding any period of financial stress almost surely entail a significant cost measured in terms of increased moral hazard, lower economic growth, and financial markets that do not always allocate resources to their most productive use.
In my experience, central bankers as a rule have an almost instinctive aversion to financial instability as I have defined it.
Those instincts are no doubt rooted, at least partly, in the historical efforts of many nations to overcome structural defects in financial markets that left their economies prone to boom-and-bust cycles.
In some cases, central banks were seen as part of the solution in addressing the results of such market imperfections.
The Federal Reserve, for example, owes its existence in large measure to the financial panics in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries in the United States that increased public recognition of the need for a lender of last resort, for more-effective bank supervision, and for greater efficiency in the payment system.
In the modern era, central banks' association with matters relating to financial stability has become broader and more formalized.
To be sure, many central bank charters give primacy to broad macroeconomic objectives such as price stability and full employment.
And, indeed, I concur with those who argue that conducting monetary policy over time so as to achieve stable prices and sustainable economic growth is the single most important contribution that central banks can make in promoting financial stability.
However, many central bank charters also recognize financial stability as an important and distinct objective, and these statutory objectives have been prominently discussed in the time since I joined the ranks of central bankers in 1997.
Over that relatively brief span, the global financial system has weathered many storms--the market turmoil in the fall of 1998, the preparations for Y2K, devastating terrorist attacks in 2001 and a recognition of the threat of future attacks, and major accounting scandals in 2002.
As I will discuss in more detail shortly, these developments have been important in shaping the international central banking policy agenda.
Key Financial Trends Before exploring some of these issues in a bit more depth, it seems useful to consider some of the longer-run trends that have set the backdrop for much of the work of central banks in international forums dealing with financial efficiency and stability.
One clear trend in many countries is an increase in market concentration in the banking sector and in other sectors of the financial services industry.
In the United States, for example, the share of assets held by the top ten commercial banks has risen from about 30 percent in 1995 to about 45 percent today.
Outside the commercial banking sector, consolidation has resulted in a small number of financial firms doing much of the equity and bond underwriting throughout the world.
A second trend is the steadily increasing share of total credit provided directly through markets rather than through intermediaries like banks.
For example, in the United States, the share of bank loans in the total outstanding debt of domestic nonfinancial corporations has declined from about 21 percent at the end of 1990 to 12 percent at the end of last year.
The growing importance of market-based finance has not, however, signaled a decline in the commercial banking industry.
U.S. banks, for example, have enjoyed record profits that stem, in part, from their activities in securities markets and in the development of new instruments.
Indeed, banks' development of sophisticated risk-management techniques helped to fuel the growth of new financial instruments.
More generally, by providing lines of credit and assuming other off-balance-sheet exposures, banks support the advancement and ongoing operation of financial markets and lower the costs of market-based finance for many market participants.
Another important trend has been the expanding scope and availability of financial instruments.
The global financial system is still well short of the theoretical ideal of complete financial markets, but clearly it is moving in that direction.
Market participants now use an array of financial instruments that, twenty years ago, were not actively traded and, in many cases, did not even exist.
The growth of derivatives is a useful example of this trend.
According to the December 2003 survey of derivatives conducted by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the notional and market values of all over-the-counter foreign exchange and interest rate derivatives contracts--rough measures of market activity--have nearly doubled in just the past two years.
The credit derivatives market is still in its infancy, but data gathered by the International Swap Dealers Association suggest that this market has registered even more spectacular growth in the past two years.
All of these new instruments allow more-effective management and pricing of risks, so the growth of these markets has surely been positive, on net, for market participants.
But the increasing complexity of these instruments also raises a host of policy questions regarding, to name just a few items, accounting treatment, disclosure policy, netting provisions, capital charges, and the enforceability of netting and collateral arrangements in bankruptcy proceedings.
A final trend worth singling out is the steady increase in global financial integration.
Borrowers today raise funds in multiple financial centers and in multiple currencies; commercial lenders and retail investors regularly take on international exposures; and arbitrageurs establish leveraged risk positions across currencies and markets.
Data collected by the BIS, for example, suggest that the volume of debt outstanding that was issued in international credit markets has more than doubled worldwide in the past four years.
Likewise, the international positions of banks worldwide have increased almost as markedly over the same interval.
For the most part, these developments suggest that global financial markets are becoming more efficient and more integrated.
But increased global financial integration carries with it some new risks.
As we learned all too well following the Russian debt default in August 1998, financial difficulties in one corner of the world can now spread in unpredictable and potentially disruptive ways to every major financial center.
In the remainder of my remarks this morning, I will draw out some of the implications of these long-run trends for the core responsibilities of many central banks, which include the conduct of monetary policy, bank supervision and regulation, and crisis management and liquidity assistance.
Monetary Policy The steadily increasing importance of markets and nonbank instruments as the primary vehicles for borrowing and lending has several important implications for monetary policy transmission and strategy.
It seems plausible, for example, that a financial system dominated by market-based finance has likely reinforced the status of the market for financial assets as the most important channel of monetary policy transmission.
This simple observation has some rather profound implications for the conduct of monetary policy.
Typically, central banks directly control a short-term interest rate, but the forward-looking nature of financial markets implies that long-term interest rates and other asset prices are determined importantly by expectations about future policy.
These expectations, in turn, are informed (one hopes) by a clear understanding of the objectives of the central bank and how it will choose to set policy in the future in response to economic developments.
Central banks have long recognized the effect their words and actions can have on interest rates and asset prices and, as a result, have increasingly moved toward greater transparency in the policy process.
The sharpened focus on transparency has been motivated in part by a desire to avoid short-run misperceptions about policymakers' intentions that can distort financial asset prices and ultimately prove detrimental to the real economy.
But central bankers have also discovered that transparency, broadly writ, can lead to improved economic performance.
Market expectations are more likely to remain anchored in the face of various shocks when investors understand that central bankers are committed to key long-run objectives such as price stability and sustainable economic growth.
Moreover, by operating in a predictable way in response to economic developments, central bankers can foster an "automatic stabilizer" of sorts in financial markets.
For example, recognizing that the central bank will seek to counter adverse demand shocks, investors will anticipate an easing in monetary policy if they observe aggregate demand weakening; in turn, that anticipation would soon be reflected in lower long-term interest rates that would cushion the drop in demand even before a change in policy is made.
This market dynamic suggests that gauging the overall effect of monetary policy requires an assessment of broad financial conditions, including policy rates, long-term interest rates and foreign exchange rates.
Although central bankers can use predictable policy actions and the forward-looking nature of financial prices to their advantage, they must also be mindful of the potential market reactions to policy actions that are not fully anticipated or that may be misinterpreted.
This, too, is an aspect of monetary policy that may have become more prominent given the evolution of financial markets in recent years.
Monetary policymakers evaluate the probabilities as well as the costs and benefits of the full range of potential economic and financial outcomes in arriving at a policy decision.
One such risk to be evaluated is the potential, particularly during times of stress, for outsized and unintended changes in interest rates and asset prices after an unexpected policy action.
Of course, the response of central banks to this risk should not be to avoid taking policy actions that are necessary to achieve macroeconomic objectives.
But central banks can mitigate the potential for unintended market reactions by communicating their goals and economic outlook as clearly as possible to inform market expectations and thereby avoid possible misperceptions about the future path for policy.
The record shows that on occasion monetary policy has been used to counter financial instability.
These incidents arise when financial instability is so great that the financial markets themselves seem to become incapable of intermediating effectively and, partially as a result of these market weaknesses, the economic outlook has been revised down sharply and the downside risks to that outlook have become quite large.
Naturally, at those moments, asset prices as well as market functioning become a focus for policymakers.
However, this does not mean that policymakers have particular targets for those asset prices--that they seek to place a floor under such prices, as some have inferred.
Rather, in those situations asset prices are evaluated in the context of all the factors bearing on the economic outlook, just as when markets are orderly, though financial market conditions in all their aspects play a particularly prominent role in such an evaluation when markets are stressed.
Bank Supervision The concentration in banking structures that I referred to earlier, coupled with the growing scope of permissible bank activities paralleling the evolving nature of the world's financial markets, has had some profound effects on bank supervision.
For one thing, supervisors worldwide have increasingly shifted the emphasis of their concern toward large banks' internal risk-management policies and systems and relatively away from individual bank positions and transactions.
Much of this shift in emphasis has reflected changes in banks' own internal policies, as increases in the scale and scope of operations have required different control and management systems to maximize risk-adjusted profits.
In addition, the change has reflected the need to alter supervisory strategy to address the reality that earlier techniques are inadequate for large, complex entities, especially given supervisors' limited resources.
The same motivations have induced U.S. and other supervisors to emphasize transparency and disclosure by the largest banks in order to exploit the potential market discipline as a supervisory supplement.
Market discipline, in turn, requires not only disclosure, but also the expectation that bank counterparties face a risk of loss.
Government guarantees in the name of stability may actually pose a greater risk of bank difficulties by reducing market discipline, or, alternatively, could require more intrusive supervision, reducing the innovative market dynamics I mentioned earlier.
If you see in these developments the seeds of Basel II--in their requirements for better risk-management systems and greater disclosure--you understand the objectives and approach of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.
The same factors are driving the proposal of the U.S. authorities to require the supervisory application of Basel II only to the largest, most complex banks, in which scale and scope imply that the necessity of continued investment in improved risk-management techniques and greater emphasis on disclosure are particularly appropriate.
These factors are, I believe, also behind the suggestion of my colleague Chairman Powell, of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, that perhaps the United States ought to consider a different supervisory policy for smaller banks than for the complex entities.
I cannot leave the subject of supervision without a brief comment on the trend to remove supervision from the responsibility of central banks and to create an overarching single supervisory authority for all financial institutions and markets.
Such a structure may well be appropriate for the jurisdictions that have adopted such regulatory frameworks, given their history and institutional development.
I certainly respect the decision of countries that have adopted the Financial Supervisory Authority model, and have thus excluded their central banks from the direct supervision and regulation of their banks.
However, I believe that such a decision has the potential to undermine a central bank's ability to manage financial crises.
At the outset of my remarks, I emphasized that financial market stability and efficiency do not require an absence of volatility and loss and indeed may require some degree of financial stress.
But, my experience also suggests that at certain times--genuine crises, particularly those with a global dimension--the central bank must act to avert disaster.
The history of the Federal Reserve in the last couple of decades suggests that central bank effectiveness requires that it have a deep and practical understanding of how banking works and, what is more, genuine credibility with bankers.
This kind of understanding and credibility can only be gained by direct interactions with banks and bankers.
In turn, such interactions, which develop the knowledge of institutions and markets that is needed for crisis management, can in my view be gained only by hands-on supervision of banking organizations.
Indirect knowledge is simply not a substitute.
In the United States, the Congress has recognized the relationship between supervision and crisis-management capability.
In its most recent review of the banking law--the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act--the Congress gave the Federal Reserve umbrella supervisory authority for the new financial holding companies as well as preserving its authority for bank holding companies and for member banks chartered by the states.
To continue to fulfill its central bank role as crisis manager, I believe the Federal Reserve must continue to have a deep, meaningful, and, most important, practical, understanding of the largest, most systemically important, banks operating in the United States, as well as an understanding of the markets in which they operate.
I believe that it can do so, in its role as umbrella supervisor of banking organizations and direct supervisor of state chartered member banks, while respecting the prerogatives of the primary supervisors of banks and other holding company subsidiaries that are not under its direct supervisory authority.
And, an important point given the U.S. institutional structure, such an approach continues to be consistent with a healthy dual banking system--in which banks chartered by the federal government and by the respective states exist and compete side-by-side.
The value of the dual banking system has withstood the test of time.
Crisis Management and Liquidity Assistance The global trends toward market finance, consolidation, and global integration has expanded the range of liquidity and other crisis scenarios that central banks may need to confront.
The market turmoil in the autumn of 1998 and the extreme risk-aversion that pervaded credit markets in 2002 amid accounting scandals in the United States may suggest that major market disruptions are probably more likely today to originate from shocks to financial markets that are outside the banking sector.
Of course, if such shocks and the attendant market stress appear to pose risks to a central bank's macroeconomic objectives, policymakers can make appropriate adjustments to the stance of monetary policy.
In addition, if policymakers are particularly concerned about improbable but highly costly events, they might well wish to consider market stress in their monetary policy deliberations even when the modal forecasts for macroeconomic variables such as inflation and economic growth have not changed much.
Central banks can also be a calming influence on markets in a crisis simply by standing ready, as I noted earlier, to provide liquidity assistance if necessary.
Although shocks may originate in global debt and equity markets, they may well reverberate in the banking sector.
For example, in 1998, banks were faced with a surge in loan demand from borrowers with reduced access to their usual market funding sources.
Assistance from the central bank may involve expanding the liquidity of the entire financial system through open market operations, or it could entail direct loans through the discount window to meet the liquidity demands of specific institutions.
On the latter point, I would note that the Federal Reserve has recently restructured its lending programs so that credit can be routinely provided to borrowers in sound condition at an above-market rate but with few other administrative criteria.
These changes should help to make the discount window even more effective in a crisis.
The trends toward consolidation and worldwide operations in the financial sector also raise some important practical questions of coordination among central banks in providing liquidity assistance should there be a situation that requires it.
For example, there are basic questions regarding arrangements among central banks on matters of collateral--the types of collateral that are acceptable, details of cross-border pledging arrangements and so on.
These seemingly simple questions are not always easy to answer in international settings, but central banks should be actively working to resolve these and other such issues that bear on their ability and preparedness to meet cross-border liquidity needs.
Conclusion Central banks have a long history of working to foster efficiency and stability in the global financial system.
That traditional role has become more complex over time as the institutional and market realities of the financial system have evolved.
Fortunately, central banks are aware of these changes and have made great progress in appropriately adapting their approaches to the execution of monetary policy, supervision, and crisis management.

Over the past two years, a considerable amount of time and energy has been expended in our country addressing corporate governance issues.
If you read the headlines in the financial press, you might think that every financial institution in the United States discovered corporate governance two years ago when the Sarbanes-Oxley act was enacted.
Well, as we all know, corporate governance is not new to U.S. financial institutions.
Senior management and boards of directors of banks, both publicly traded and privately held, have a tradition of taking their responsibilities for ensuring effective governance seriously.
In my comments today, I would like to address the state of corporate governance at community banks.
I'll discuss the assessments some of the consultants and public accountants are giving the banking industry and I'll contrast that to what we are observing through the examination process.
I'll also touch on some of the developing "best practices" in corporate governance, internal controls and operational risk management.
Many of these best practices seem to be resulting from community bankers like you modifying the Sarbanes-Oxley corporate governance requirements to make them relevant for your individual business and corporate structure.
At the Federal Reserve, we tend to favor best-practice approaches for corporate governance at community banks rather than a one-size-fits-all approach.
Corporate Governance Perspective of Consultants I'll start with a report card on the state of corporate governance at community banks issued by the major consulting and accounting firms.
Recently, several have reported on the governance practices at financial services firms, including community banks.
These studies begin by recognizing the progress financial services firms have made in the areas of director independence, audit committee oversight, and overall board awareness of governance issues within their organizations.
These studies cite a growing sensitivity to governance issues among employees and a heightened awareness among senior management and the board.
They cite improvements in "governance type" disclosures to shareholders/stakeholders and increased vigilance on the part of the regulatory agencies.
However, a number of these studies conclude by saying that banks and other financial services firms have a long road ahead of them if they are to achieve the goal of effective corporate governance.
Based on these studies, it sounds like the firms believe that bank corporate governance practices should receive the equivalent of a C grade with a needs improvement notation.
Why is this?
According to a global survey of financial institutions conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers, part of the reason why financial institutions are not making the grade is that they equate effective governance with meeting the demands of regulators and legislators.1 That is, they tend to look at this as another compliance exercise.
The study goes on to state that the compliance mentality is limiting the ability of these institutions to achieve strategic advantages through governance.
I would agree that any institution who views corporate governance as merely a compliance exercise is missing the mark.
We all are aware of companies in various industries who have successfully presented their strategic vision to investors, but who later stumble because the execution of that strategy did not meet expectations.
While the reasons for shortfalls can occur for many reasons, one of the more common shortcomings is that the strategy itself was focused too much on market and financial results without adequate attention to the infrastructure necessary to support and sustain the strategy.
Corporate strategies often focus on the most likely future scenario and the benefits of a strategic initiative.
A sound governance, risk management, and internal control environment starts by being part of the strategic planning exercise.
That is, while the strategy is being considered, managers and board members should be asking: What are the major risks of this plan?
How much risk exposure are we willing to accept?
What mitigating controls need to be in place to effectively limit these risks?
How will we know if these controls are working effectively?
In other words, by considering risks as part of the planning process, controls can be built into the design, the costs of errors and reworking in the initial rollout can be reduced, and the ongoing initiative can be more successful because monitoring can reveal when activities and results are missing their intended goals, so that corrective actions can be initiated more promptly.
Many of these studies note that it is very difficult for outsiders to determine the effectiveness of governance.
Unfortunately, it takes significant breaks in internal controls for the public to be aware of weaknesses in the process.
The disclosure of deficient business and governance practices can then lead to lower share prices, the likelihood of potential shareholder lawsuits and enforcement actions, the loss of credibility and damage to a bank's reputation, and the payment of higher spreads to access capital markets.
The size of potential detrimental impacts due to a serious breach in governance can place the costs of improved governance in perspective.
Several studies highlight that institutions are spending more on corporate governance today than in the past.
According to Grant Thornton's 2003 Eleventh Annual Survey of Community Bank Executives,2 it isn't just large organizations that are feeling the cost impact of corporate governance.
Community banks not subject to the Sarbanes-Oxley and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement (FDICIA) acts experienced or are expected to incur increases in costs for a number of services and functions related to corporate governance.
Seventy-three percent of these banks expected to incur increases in general audit fees; sixty-two percent expected to incur increases in director and officer liability insurance premiums; thirty-two percent expected to incur increases in financial education costs for directors; and twelve percent expected to incur increases in costs associated with attracting and retaining board members.
In response to this study, a logical question is whether the benefits outweigh the costs.
Many of you are reflecting on the first quarter 2004 discussion of your annual operating results, budget estimates, and income projections that were presented at recent board and staff meetings.
True, these costs reduced some of your current profitability goals.
But corporate managers have demonstrated over the years that focusing on better process management can enhance financial returns and customer satisfaction.
They have learned that correcting errors, downtime in critical systems, lack of training for staff to promptly handle their changing tasks, all create higher costs and lost revenue opportunities.
I would challenge you to consider the appropriate corporate governance structure suitable to your bank's unique business strategy and scale as an important investment, and consider returns on that investment in terms of the avoidance of the costs of poor internal controls.
Corporate Governance Perspective of Regulators Now I would like to discuss the grade the regulatory community has given the community banks on their corporate governance practices.
Regulators typically measure effectiveness by some sort of examination assessment.
Using the current CAMELS type of assessment, a review of recent Federal Reserve examination results would indicate that most community banks have effective corporate governance.
Eighty-four percent of all community banks reviewed were rated highly with respect to risk management practices, including corporate governance.
This is not to say that we don't see the need for improvement in certain areas.
Examination findings routinely cite ways in which risk management, including corporate governance, could be improved.
However, it is apparent that the senior management, boards, and audit committees in these highly rated organizations are setting annual agendas that focus attention on the high-risk and emerging risk areas within their banks while continuing to provide appropriate oversight to the low-risk areas.
Internal auditors, or equivalent functions at these banks, are testing to determine whether the risk management program is effective and are communicating the results to the board and audit committee.
So, the examination results appear to indicate that the majority of banks are getting the message on the basics of sound governance.
I would almost like to stop my speech here and conclude by saying, "All is well in the banking industry."
However, we also performed a review of the corporate governance at the subset of banks with weak or unsatisfactory ratings.
Not surprisingly, the review identified the major challenges facing these banks to be poor asset quality and corporate governance issues, such as policies, planning, management, audits, controls, and systems.
Eighty-nine percent of the community banks in this group experienced serious asset quality problems, which was the most significant factor resulting in their low rating.
Sixty percent of the community banks in this group experienced significant deficiencies in corporate governance.
The corporate governance deficiencies could broadly be described as internal control weaknesses, weak or inadequate internal audit coverage, significant violations of law, accounting system weaknesses, and information technology issues.
Obviously, poor asset quality and ineffective corporate governance are not mutually exclusive.
When we find significant asset quality problems, we usually find corporate governance problems--particularly inadequate internal controls.
Similarly, when we find significant control deficiencies, significant asset quality or financial reporting problems are generally present.
So, what is the message we should take away from these statistics?
On the one hand, we could pat ourselves on the back and say that things are generally going very well for most of the industry and we can finally tone down all of the corporate governance rhetoric.
Or, we could say those negative statistics only apply to the boards and senior managers at a small group of poorly rated institutions who now have to pay the price.
Or, yet again, we could say that effective corporate governance is a continuous process that requires ongoing vigilance on the part of the board, audit committee, senior management, and others within your bank.
I hope you are thinking along the lines of this last sentiment.
As you know, once an organization gets lax in its approach to corporate governance, problems tend to follow.
Many of you can recall the time and attention management devoted to Section 112 of FDICIA, which first required management reports and auditor attestations in the early 1990s.
Then the process became routine, delegated to lower levels of management, and stale to the changes in the way the business was being run.
That is when the breaks in internal controls occur.
Unfortunately, trying to change the culture again is taking an exceptional amount of senior management and directors' time--time taken away from building the business.
The challenge, therefore, is to ensure that the corporate governance at community banks keeps pace with the changing risks that you will face in the coming years.
Another consequence of so much public attention on the breakdowns in controls at a few organizations is difficulty in finding good directors.
One common theme we have heard during our examinations is the challenge facing banks of all sizes to retain, or attract, board members with the appropriate depth of understanding and commitment to sound corporate governance practices.
Many potential directors who have the experience needed are cautious about the potential liability they face.
They also would rather join a board on which they are able to balance their time among all of the areas of oversight--strategy, marketing, financial performance, human resource development, community involvement, and so on--and not just governance, compliance, audits, and internal controls.
This is another result of inconsistent attention over time to good governance practices.
Operational Risk The Federal Reserve System is also conducting selected reviews for operational risk at community banks.
By operational risk, I mean "the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events," which is the definition used by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.
At the Federal Reserve, we are placing an increasing focus on operational risk.
In part, this is due to the significant improvements we have seen in the last two decades in interest rate and credit risk management.
Thus, weaknesses in governance and internal controls and operational risks become more apparent.
For example, at one of our Reserve Banks we are conducting a pilot program specifically geared toward the operational risk activities of smaller community banks, those with less than $500 million in assets.
One of the objectives of the program is to identify and test the key internal controls used by banks to mitigate operational risk exposures.
The reviews focus on specific business processes with high operational risk -- for example, the wire transfer and loan administration areas.
Based on the results of these reviews, the bankers involved have responded very favorably to the program and indicated they have received measurable benefits.
Moreover, the program has identified some common operational control weaknesses to which we believe community banks should pay particular attention.
Let's use wire transfers and loan administration as examples.
With wires and similar transactions, the bank could suffer a significant financial loss from unauthorized transfers, as well as incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risk factors are not properly mitigated.
A few recurring recommendations from our reviews, are to: (1) establish reasonable approval and authorization requirements for these transactions to ensure that an appropriate level of management is aware of the transaction and establish better accountability; (2) establish call-back procedures, passwords, funds transfer agreements, and other authentication controls related to customer wire transfer requests; and (3) pay increased attention to authentication controls, since this area may also be particularly susceptible to external fraud.
Loan administration is an area where a bank could suffer a significant financial loss from the lack of appropriate segregation of duties or dual controls, as well as incur considerable damage to its reputation if operational risk factors are not properly mitigated.
A few recurring recommendations from our reviews, are to: (1) ensure that loan officers do not have the ability to book and maintain their own loans, (2) limit employee access to loan system computer applications that are inconsistent with their responsibilities, and (3) provide consistent guidance--policies and procedures--to line staff on how to identify and handle unusual transactions.
We have several other recommendations that resulted from these reviews and have a number of operational risk initiatives underway currently.
We expect to summarize these findings and provide further updates and guidance to the industry as we move forward.
But given the examples of best practice I just mentioned, these are not revolutionary insights.
Well-run organizations have these or similar controls in place.
We hope these studies serve as reminders that can be used to help bank managers keep the focus on continuous improvements in internal controls as part of the normal business process.
Observations on Best Practices Finally, I would like to focus on some best practices for corporate governance at community banks.
Rather than talk broadly about best practices, I'll focus on certain aspects of internal controls and operational risk management.
Best Practice 1: Adopt a recognized internal control framework that works for the bank.
All banks have some framework for internal control.
What I'm suggesting as a best practice is to adopt a version of the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) of the Treadway Commission's Internal Control--Integrated Framework.3 Don't be put off by the titles of these frameworks.
These frameworks are flexible enough to work effectively at a $25 million bank or a multi-billion dollar financial institution.
The COSO framework describes how each internal control element can be tailored to smaller and less complex organizations.
For example, if COSO is used as a best practice, you should modify the five following elements of internal control to meet your organization's needs.
Control Environment --Board members and senior managers should identify the bank's key business strategies, objectives, and goals and tailor COSO to influence the bank's management philosophy, culture, and ethics to establish and maintain an appropriate control environment.
Risk Assessment--Managers should look at the risks inherent in the businesses and processes they manage, and determine the bank's risk appetite and establish risk measurement practices that are appropriate for their organization.
Control Activities--Managers should establish and maintain controls and monitoring processes that ensure they will be effective in achieving the organization's profit and other objectives based on a designated level of risk.
Managers should monitor the organization's business plan to assess how risk exposures are changing and determine whether new controls, or changes in existing controls, are needed to manage that level of risk.
Information and Communication--Information required to successfully achieve the organization's control objectives should typically be accumulated in a management information system and should be communicated through reliable channels to all responsible parties--from tellers to board members.
Normal bank communication channels should normally be adequate for this purpose.
However, new channels may be necessary if the type of information is too sensitive to communicate over existing channels, or if that information may be risky to the individual making the communication (in other words, the knowledge of an incident of identified fraud for a whistle blower).
Monitoring--Monitoring should typically be the role of internal audit.
A number of community banks do not have a permanent internal audit department.
Recognizing this, each community bank must develop a review (audit) function that is appropriate to its size and the nature and scope of its activities.
As you may know, COSO is just about to release a revised framework that will incorporate enterprise risk management (ERM).
When this is issued, the best practices in these five elements will need to be re-evaluated to address ERM.
Best Practice 2: Adopt a program for independently assessing the effectiveness of internal controls on at least an annual basis.
Boards of directors and audit committees are responsible for ensuring that their organizations have effective internal controls that are adequate for the nature and scope of their businesses and are subject to an effective audit process.
Effective internal control is the responsibility of line management.
Line managers must determine the acceptable level of risk in their line of business and must assure themselves that they are getting an appropriate return for this risk and adequate capital is being maintained.
Supporting functions such as accounting, internal audit, risk management, credit review, compliance, and legal should independently monitor and test the control processes to ensure that they are effective.
Implementing management reports on internal controls comparable to those required under Sarbanes-Oxley and FDICIA 112 can also assist community bank boards of directors and audit committees in obtaining a better understanding of the controllable risks within the bank and the quality of the controls in place over those risks.
Sarbanes-Oxley and FDCIA 112 require an annual management assessment of internal control effectiveness and an attestation of management's assessment and the effectiveness of controls by the bank's external auditor.
Community bank management could perform periodic assessments of internal control effectiveness.
Another group of employees within the bank could perform an independent evaluation of management's report.
By independent, I do not necessarily mean an external auditor should be engaged to issue a report.
In this sense, independent may mean that internal audit is brought in to perform something similar to an external auditor's attestation.
The details of such an approach need to be worked out.
The important point is that the audit committee should have some reasonably independent assessment of management's report.
Audit committee members could use these reports to set the audit plan for the next year, to track how risks have changed and are changing within the organization, and to facilitate discussion of which controls should be added.
Best Practice 3: Adopt a framework for assessing operational risk Over the past few years, the discussion of operational risk management has increased significantly in banking circles.
In 2003, the Basel Committee released a paper, "Sound Practices for the Management and Supervision of Operational Risk.
"4 This paper sets forth a set of broad principles that should govern the management of operational risk at banks of all sizes.
Although operational risk is nothing new to community banks, the prospect of addressing this risk in a structured framework with measurable results is something new.
The broad variety of products and services that banks provide, the evolution of business processes, and changes in the ethical environment in which we live have all contributed to more observable exposures to this type of risk.
Managers and boards are beginning to gather the information necessary to monitor and understand the growing risks inherent in their operations.
Supervisors are developing approaches for measuring and evaluating operating risk.
At the Federal Reserve, we are studying different approaches and have a project underway to develop guidance on how to address this risk.
In the near future, we plan to compare our observations on best practices on internal controls and operational risk management practices with yours to develop some useful resource materials for good corporate governance at community banks.
Conclusion In conclusion, community banks are further improving their traditional focus on strong corporate governance.
Those banks leading the way recognize that the culture of governance, ethics, and controls cannot readily be switched on and off.

