I also want to thank you for giving so much of your time to help us identify ways to reduce unnecessary and unduly burdensome regulatory requirements on financial institutions.
There is a real need to continually review the cost-benefit nexus of regulations, especially with the fast pace of evolution in financial markets and institutions.
Thus, my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System and I are strong supporters of the goals of today's meeting.
It is a critical supplement to our own efforts, which include a review of our regulations every five years to revise or rescind out-of-date or unnecessary rules.
I thought that after lunch you might find it interesting to shift to a discussion of the financial health of bank customers and the economy.
In that spirit, I would like to briefly share with you my assessment of the economic outlook and then to discuss in more detail how the evolution of household and business balance sheets in recent years is affecting economic activity.
You should understand, however, that I am expressing my own opinions, which are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board or on the Federal Open Market Committee.
The Economic Outlook As you know, real GDP grew at an annual rate of 6.2 percent in the second half of 2003, and the economic fundamentals seem to be in place for another sizable advance this year.
Indeed, the central tendency range of FOMC-member forecasts is 4-1/2 to 5 percent.
Yet despite the recent strong pace of economic activity, the labor market has improved at an unusually slow pace by historical standards.
The most recent data--indicating a jump in payrolls in March--was good news, and I am cautiously optimistic that job growth will pick up further over the remainder of this year.
My business contacts tell me that companies have become more optimistic about economic prospects and that their plans do include increases in the size of their payrolls.
The latest data on consumer prices suggest that the process of disinflation may have come to an end.
In March 2004, the twelve-month change in the core CPI rose to 1.6 percent--essentially the same pace as in March 2003, and the core PCE price index change from twelve months earlier moved back above the 1 percent level in both February and March.
Although the increased pace of economic activity has put some upward pressure on prices at earlier stages of processing and higher energy prices are being passed through to the prices of some products, strong productivity growth and slack in resource utilization have kept core retail price increases in check.
Household Financial Conditions Some commentators have expressed concern about the rapid growth in household debt in recent years, fearing that households have become overextended and will need to rein in their spending to keep their debt burdens under control.
My view, however, is considerably more sanguine.
Although there are pockets of financial stress among households, the sector as a whole appears to be in good shape.
As bankers, you are well aware that households have taken on quite a bit of debt over the past several years.
According to the latest available data, total household debt grew at an annual rate of 10 percent between the end of 1999 and the fourth quarter of 2003; in comparison, after-tax household income increased at a rate of 5 percent.
But looking below the aggregate data, we must understand that the rapid growth in household debt reflects largely a surge in mortgage borrowing, which has been fueled by historically low mortgage interest rates and strong growth in house prices.
Indeed, many homeowners have taken advantage of low interest rates to refinance their mortgages, some having done so several times over the past couple of years.
Survey data suggest that homeowners took out cash in more than one-half of these "refis," often to pay down loans with higher interest rates.
On net, the resulting drop in the average interest rate on household borrowings, combined with the lengthening maturity of their total debt, has tempered the monthly payment obligations from the growing stock of homeowners' outstanding debt.
The Federal Reserve publishes two series that quantify the burden of household obligations.
The first series, the debt service ratio, measures the required payments on mortgage and consumer debt as a share of after-tax personal income.
The second series, the financial obligations ratio, is a broader version of the debt service ratio that includes required household payments on rent, auto leases, homeowners' insurance, and property taxes.
Both ratios rose during the 1990s, and both reached a peak in late 2001.
Since then, however, they have receded slightly on net from their respective peaks, an indication that households, in the aggregate, have been keeping an eye on repayment burdens.
Because the debt service ratio and the financial obligations ratio are calculated from aggregate data, they do not necessarily indicate whether the typical household is experiencing financial stress.
Nonetheless, we have found that changes in either ratio help predict future changes in consumer loan delinquencies.
Accordingly, the fact that these ratios have come off their recent peaks is a hopeful sign about household loan performance.
Indeed, delinquency rates for a wide range of household loans turned down over the second half of 2003.
Another often-cited indicator of household financial conditions is the personal bankruptcy rate.
Movements in the bankruptcy rate, to be sure, partly reflect changes in the incidence of financial stress, but the rate has been trending up for more than two decades for a variety of other reasons.
The Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 made bankruptcy a more attractive option for most households by increasing the amount of wealth that households could retain after bankruptcy.
Other factors that have likely contributed to the upward trend are the decrease in the social stigma of filing for bankruptcy and the growing access to credit in the United States.
As lenders have become more sophisticated in their ability to assess the riskiness of borrowers, they have extended loans to households that were previously denied credit.
These households are more likely to default on their obligations than the typical borrower, but this increased risk is priced into loan terms.
Although the bankruptcy rate remains elevated, it has edged down on balance in recent months, likely because of the pickup in economic growth in the United States since mid-2003.
This relatively upbeat assessment of household credit quality seems to be shared by lenders and by investors in securities backed by consumer debt.
According to the Federal Reserve's survey of senior loan officers, the number of banks tightening their standards on consumer loans has fallen over the past year.
This behavior certainly does not point to much concern about household loan performance.
Moreover, one gets an even more positive message from the credit spreads on securities backed by auto loans and credit card receivables.
In recent months, the spreads between the yields on these securities and swap rates of comparable maturities have narrowed across the credit spectrum.
Thus far, I have focused on the liability side of the household balance sheet, but there have been favorable developments on the asset side as well.
Equity prices rallied strongly last year and have continued to rise this year, reversing a good chunk of the losses sustained over the previous three years.
In addition, home prices appreciated sharply during each year from 1997 to 2003.
The cumulative rise since the late 1990s has exceeded the growth in per capita income by a wide margin.
All told, the ratio of household net worth to disposable income--a useful summary of the sector's financial position--recovered last year to stand at a level about equal to its average over the past decade.
Before I turn to the business sector, let me address the frequently expressed concern that a bubble may have developed in house prices after several years of rapid increases.
Some of the measured price rise results from improvements in the quality of houses.
Houses are bigger and have more amenities than in the past, two characteristics that will lead to rising average house prices over time.
But even after one controls for quality, increases in home prices have been outstripping general price inflation by a considerable margin in recent years.
Once again, the low interest rates are probably an important factor.
Houses, like other assets, generate an expected stream of future benefits.
With low interest rates, these future benefits are discounted less heavily, which raises the asset's price today.
Low interest rates also push up house prices by boosting the demand for housing.
Of course, some of that increased demand is being met by the rapid pace of construction of new housing.
But building houses takes time, and in the interim, higher demand will push up the price of existing houses.
Although we can identify the key forces behind the rise in house prices in recent years, we cannot be sure that the increases are fully justified by the prevailing fundamentals.
Still, we need to keep the recent increases in house prices in perspective: Although house prices have been outstripping broad measures of inflation--even after adjusting for quality improvements--their rise is nothing like the increase in stock market prices in the late 1990s.
In fact, the speculative forces that can sometimes drive equity prices to extremes are less likely to emerge in housing prices.
First, buying and selling houses is a lot more expensive and cumbersome than buying and selling equities, which makes taking a speculative position in houses much more difficult.
Second, housing markets are much more local than equity markets, which are national, if not global, in scope.
So if any speculative frenzy emerged, it would be much less likely to spread in the housing markets than in equity markets.
Finally, financial institutions have a much more disciplined process regarding the housing and construction lending market than they did in past housing cycles.
Lenders today are cautious about lending for speculative purposes, and appraised values undergo more scrutiny than in the past.
The expansion of credit to higher risk households may also have driven banks to strengthen their underwriting procedures.
That said, local housing markets can certainly become overvalued and then experience sharp price declines.
House prices fell significantly in several parts of the country in the early 1990s.
But because the transactions costs are much higher in the housing market than in the equity market and because the underlying demand for living space is much more predictable than are the prospects for any given firm, the large increases and decreases often observed in the stock market are less likely to occur in the market for houses.
In addition, lenders are much more responsive to local economic conditions and generally become more cautious in loan underwriting when unsold homes or local unemployment increase.
Financial Conditions of Businesses The change in the economy that caught my attention in the second half of 2003 was that the decline in business fixed investment had finally ceased.
Capital spending by businesses posted a solid increase in the second half of last year, and orders and shipments for nondefense capital goods--key indicators of equipment spending--point to further sizable gains.
Moreover, the tenor of anecdotes from the corporate sector has become comparatively upbeat, with corporate managers seeing stronger revenue growth and a much improved and more accommodative financing environment.
Four factors have contributed to this improvement in financial conditions: low interest rates, a widespread restructuring of corporate liabilities during the past few years, a sharp rebound in corporate profitability from its trough in 2001, and a substantial narrowing in market risk premiums.
In addition, the burden of underfunded pension plans, perhaps the most prominent negative financial factor that remains, has eased of late.
I will discuss each factor in turn.
First, firms are continuing to benefit from the accommodative stance of monetary policy.
With the federal funds rate at 1 percent, short-term borrowing costs remain very low.
For longer-term debt, the combination of low yields on benchmark Treasury securities and reduced risk spreads has kept borrowing costs attractive.
Indeed, the yield on Moody's Baa corporate bond index is at its lowest sustained level since 1968.
Second, in response to low long-term rates and to investors' concerns arising from some high-profile, unanticipated meltdowns, firms have greatly strengthened their balance sheets.
Many firms have refinanced high-cost debt, which has reduced the average interest rate on the debt of nonfinancial corporations more than 1 percentage point since the end of 2000.
Businesses also have substituted long-term debt for short-maturity debt to improve their balance sheet liquidity and to reduce the risk of rolling over funds.
In addition, many firms--especially in the most troubled industries--have retired debt through equity offerings and asset sales, which limited the growth of nonfinancial corporate debt in 2002 and 2003 to the slowest pace since the early 1990s.
Third, firms have significantly tightened their belts.
Over the past two years, the drive to cut costs has generated rapid productivity gains.
This greater efficiency boosted corporate profitability in 2002 and 2003 despite rather tepid revenue growth.
Moreover, a pickup in revenue growth in the second half of last year helped companies leverage those productivity gains, producing a dramatic recovery in overall corporate profitability.
Over 2003, economic profits before tax surged more than 18 percent, bringing profit margins to their highest levels in several years.
Fourth, risk premiums fell substantially last year as corporate governance scandals receded and investor sentiment turned markedly more positive.
The recovery in stock prices reflects this brighter view.
Spreads on corporate bonds have narrowed appreciably--especially for the riskiest firms--and they now stand at the lowest levels in several years.
This decline in spreads has been helped by the beneficial effect of the balance sheet improvements that I mentioned a moment ago.
Indicators of corporate financial stress, such as bond rating downgrades and default rates, have returned to levels normally associated with economic expansion.
Delinquency rates on business loans at commercial banks have also declined, and our surveys indicate that, on balance, banks have recently eased the terms and standards on such loans for both large and small firms.
Another sign of improved sentiment is that money has been flowing into riskier securities.
For example, net inflows to equity mutual funds have been strong for about a year, and high-yield bond funds, too, registered strong net inflows in 2003.
Junk bond issuance has picked up notably, and the market for initial public equity offerings has also shown signs of recovery, while investors still appear to be more selective than during the boom in the late 1990s.
These four points all suggest that financial conditions are capable of supporting a sustained, healthy pickup in economic growth.
The much improved profitability can help finance expansion directly out of internal funds or indirectly by supporting firms' borrowing capacity.
Furthermore, firms will be able to draw on their liquid assets that have accumulated over the past couple of years.
And given the successful efforts to pare costs, firms are set to benefit from new investment in plant and equipment.
Perhaps the biggest financial hurdle still facing many corporations is the burden of underfunding in their defined-benefit (DB) pension plans, but even here we have seen some improvement.
Stock market losses during 2000 to 2002 had significantly eroded the value of pension assets, while sharply declining interest rates had raised the current value of plan liabilities.
As a result, the majority of S&P 500 plans were underfunded at the end of 2002, with a net shortfall that exceeded $200 billion.
Thus, many companies needed to make additional contributions, in some cases quite substantial, to their pension plans.
In 2002, S&P 500 firms contributed $46 billion to their pension plans--three times more than in either of the previous two years--and total contributions are estimated to have been even higher in 2003.
This drain on corporate sponsors' cash resources is likely to ease in the near term, but longer-term issues remain.
DB pension asset values have benefited from robust returns in equity markets since early last year.
And earlier this month the President signed legislation that allows firms to reduce plan contributions for two years by permitting them to use a corporate bond rate rather than a Treasury bond rate to calculate liabilities.
But beyond the near-term, firms with DB pensions tend to be in maturing industries with aging workforces, for which the growth of liabilities are high and rising.
This longer-term challenge will remain even if the current favorable market conditions are sustained.
Conclusion In summary, recent indicators suggest that the pace of economic activity remains solid, while inflationary pressures continue to be subdued.

I know that you have a keen interest in the likely future course of the economy and of monetary policy, so I will use my time today to comment on both topics.
I will begin with the economic outlook, discussing prospects for economic growth, the labor market, and inflation, and conclude by drawing some implications for monetary policy.
As always, my views are my responsibility alone and are not to be ascribed to my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.1 The Prospects for Economic Growth Broadly, the economy has shown substantially increased vitality since the middle of last year, and with the passage of time the economic recovery has shown increasing signs of becoming self-sustaining.
Judging from the most recent data, growth in domestic spending appears consistent with growth in real gross domestic product (GDP) in the range of 4-1/2 to 5 percent for the first quarter and at a rate of 4 percent or higher for 2004 as a whole.
One reason for increased confidence that the recovery is becoming self-sustaining is that the expansion of aggregate demand has become more broad-based, with households, firms, and government all making contributions to spending growth.
Household spending, which has not slackened significantly at any point in the past three years, has continued its advance, supported by positive wealth effects and tax cuts.
Except for a modest decline in auto sales (relative to the strong pace of the previous quarter), consumer expenditures on most major categories of goods and services were well sustained in the first quarter, as recent data on retail sales testify.
Household spending is likely to continue to grow at a solid pace for the remainder of this year, especially if the job market improves as expected.
A question that many have asked is whether household spending, including spending on new homes, will remain strong if interest rates rise.
I think that consumers are not badly positioned for a normal cyclical increase in interest rates.
The balance sheets of most households are in good shape: Perhaps most important, the ratio of household net worth to income is relatively high, not far below its pre-recession level.
Also, households took advantage of low long-term rates during the last cycle to reduce their exposure to short-term and high-interest debt.
Although household debt burdens have risen, most household debt today is in the form of mortgage debt, of which some 85 to 90 percent is at fixed rates and thus insulated from interest-rate increases.
The decision to purchase a home is probably the most interest-sensitive decision made by households.
Private housing starts rebounded in March from a possibly weather-related dip in February, and sales of new and existing homes during the first quarter remained close to record levels.
I expect residential investment to continue strong this year.
Mortgage rates have risen in the past month but remain low relative to historical experience, while new household formation, improved job prospects, and income growth should ensure a continued healthy demand for housing.
However, residential investment is unlikely to rise much further from current high levels and thus its contribution to GDP growth over the next year or two can be expected to decline.
Energy price increases have reduced households' real disposable personal income by about $30 billion since December.
This development will probably shave a tenth or two from the growth in personal consumption expenditures in 2004 but thus far, at least, the rise in energy prices does not materially affect the outlook.
A key factor in the economic turnaround in the third quarter of 2003 was the resurgence in business fixed investment, particularly in equipment and software.
That component of spending seems set to continue to expand as output grows, profits improve, and firms become more confident in the durability of the recovery.
Double-digit growth in real spending on equipment and software seems quite possible this year, in part because the expiration of partial expensing allowances at the end of 2004 will lead some firms to move forward investment they otherwise would have made in 2005.
Given the very low inventory stocks currently held by businesses, inventory investment should also support growth.
In contrast, nonresidential investment remains weak, reflecting low capacity utilization rates in factories and high vacancy rates in office buildings, and the improvement in that sector seems likely to be gradual.
The Federal government's budget deficit is expected to peak this year at something between $450 billion and $500 billion.
Both increased government expenditures and reduced taxes will support growth in aggregate demand in 2004, though fiscal policy will provide somewhat less impetus and may even be slightly restrictive in 2005.
U.S. exports are likely to continue their recent rise, because of a weaker dollar and economic recovery among our trading partners.
However, rising U.S. incomes will spur imports as well.
On net, the external sector will probably continue to be a slight drag on U.S. growth, and little if any progress is likely to be made in closing the current account deficit this year.
The State of the Labor Market As you know, the recovery in labor markets has not kept pace with the recovery in output, an issue that has been central in recent debates about economic policy.
As has been widely noted, the leading explanation for the slow recovery in the labor market has been the remarkable ability of employers and workers to increase labor productivity.
Over the four quarters of 2003, output per hour in the nonfarm business sector is estimated to have risen 5.4 percent, up from an already robust 4.3 percent gain the previous year.
Output per hour probably grew at a rate exceeding 4 percent in the first quarter of this year, accounting for the lion's share of growth during the quarter.
Although these productivity increases are unalloyed good news for the U.S. economy in the longer term, in the short run they have allowed firms to expand production rapidly while adding fewer workers than would be normal in a cyclical expansion.
I and many others have argued that this situation cannot persist: As managers exhaust the possibilities for outsized productivity gains and become convinced of the durability of the expansion, they should become increasingly more willing to add employees (Bernanke, 2003b).
Unfortunately, the pace of productivity gains and hence of employment growth has proved difficult to forecast.
If we look past the erratic month-to-month changes in payrolls, the labor market does appear to be gradually improving.
On average, private nonfarm payrolls grew by 161,000 per month in the first quarter, up from 58,000 per month in the fourth quarter of 2003.
Recent employment gains have not been confined to a few industries.
For example, in March the one-month employment diffusion index, which measures the proportion of industries with expanding employment relative to the share of industries with contracting employment, reached its highest value since July 2000.
Initial claims for unemployment insurance have also been falling and are now at pre-recession levels.
The decline in initial claims is consistent with other data that suggest that the pace of layoffs has slackened considerably.
The rate of new hiring has been exceptionally sluggish for the past several years, however, and the available evidence suggests modest improvement at best in hiring rates so far this year.
Although the labor market appears to be sitting up and taking fluids, it has not hopped out of bed and begun a round of jumping jacks.
Despite the strong payroll gains in March, nonfarm payrolls remain 343,000 below their level of November 2001, the official trough of the recession, and private nonfarm payrolls are more than half a million below the trough level.
The average workweek of production and nonsupervisory workers declined slightly in March; at 33.7 hours, the workweek is low on an absolute basis and barely above the 33.6 hours average attained during the third quarter of last year, the lowest quarterly figure in 2003.
The data I have cited thus far come from reports provided by employers, through what is known as the payroll survey.
Much has been made of the differences between the results of the payroll survey and those from the household survey, which is based on the responses from a random sample of households.2 When its coverage is adjusted to be comparable to that of the payroll survey, the household survey shows a net gain of about 1.7 million jobs since the November 2001 trough, compared with the already noted loss of more than 300,000 jobs reported by the payroll survey.
Since June of last year, when the pace of output growth picked up significantly, employment as measured by the household survey (on a comparable payroll basis) has risen by 1.42 million jobs, more than double the increase of 689,000 jobs reported by the payroll survey.
Recent revisions of both surveys--in the case of the household survey, to take into account the likelihood that immigration to the United States since 2003 has been below earlier estimates--have only modestly reduced the gap in estimated job creation.3 Although resolving the differences between the two surveys is important, my own assessment of the labor market does not change markedly even if substantial credence is given to the data drawn from the household survey.
For example, although the unemployment rate (measured by the household survey) has fallen to 5.7 percent from its peak of 6.3 percent last June, that rate remains high relative to recent experience and in comparison to most plausible recent estimates of the sustainable rate of unemployment.
The evidence suggests, moreover, that the official unemployment rate of 5.7 percent understates to some extent the true amount of slack in the labor market.
Notably, to a greater degree than in past cycles, discouraged job seekers have been withdrawing from the labor market rather than reporting themselves as unemployed.
According to the household survey, the labor force participation rate has actually declined significantly since the official trough of the cycle, from 66.7 percent of the working-age population in November 2001 to 65.9 percent in March 2004.4 From its peak last June, the unemployment rate has fallen by 0.6 percentage point, from 6.3 percent to 5.7 percent.
However, during the same period, the labor force participation rate also fell by 0.6 percentage point, from 66.5 percent to its current value of 65.9 percent.
The net result is that the employment-to-population ratio has barely changed since the middle of last year.
Thus even the household survey, its relatively more encouraging job-creation numbers notwithstanding, paints a picture of ongoing softness in the labor market.
So long as the labor market is weak, the economic recovery will be incomplete.
Indeed, by reducing confidence and spending, a failure of the labor market to improve could conceivably threaten the sustainability of the expansion.
One way to see the extent of the slack in the labor market, as measured even by the household survey, is to ask how much job creation would be needed to bring the unemployment rate down further.
Underlying the household survey's employment calculations is an estimate that the adult non-institutional population grew in March by 193,000 people.
If the population grows by the same absolute amount in April and the labor force participation rate remains unchanged at 65.9 percent, the labor force will grow by about 127,000 during the month.
To keep the unemployment rate at 5.7 percent in April, then, household employment (as opposed to payroll employment) would have to grow by 120,000 jobs.
To reduce the unemployment rate under these assumptions, of course, more than 120,000 net new jobs would be needed.
The standard calculation I just presented was based on the assumption that the rate of labor force participation does not change, an assumption that may not be valid during a cyclical recovery in the labor market.
If people perceive a significant improvement in the job market, new job seekers may enter or re-enter the labor force as employment grows.
To illustrate the possible implications, let us suppose that improving job prospects lead the participation rate to rise 0.1 percentage point in April, from 65.9 percent to 66.0 percent.
(Remember, the rate was 66.5 percent as recently as last June.)
This increase in the participation rate would imply a total increase in the labor force (including the portion attributed to the rise in population) of some 350,000 people and hence a need for more than 330,000 net new jobs to keep the unemployment rate from rising.
The implication is that, with the labor market still in a relatively early stage of its cyclical recovery, an unusually high rate of job creation may be required for a time to bring the labor market back into balance.
In short, the unusual rate of productivity growth has driven a wedge between the recovery in output and the recovery in the labor market, leaving considerable cyclical slack in the labor market despite ongoing growth in output.
The economic recovery will not be fully realized, in my view, until the labor market has established a more normal cyclical pattern of expansion.5 The Outlook for Inflation Forecasts of inflation, particularly core inflation (which excludes the more volatile energy and food price components), are of course another key input to monetary policy decisions.
The core inflation data for the past couple of months have been slightly above market expectations.
More time will be needed to assess the significance of these recent numbers; possibly, they may reflect the unwinding of some downward surprises to core inflation late last year.
Based on the information currently available, my own best guess is that core inflation has stopped falling and appears to be stabilizing in the vicinity of 1-1/2 percent, comfortably within my own preferred range of 1 to 2 percent.
The dominant fundamental factors influencing the inflation outlook are the ongoing resource slack and the remarkable rate of productivity growth.
Together, these factors imply that unit labor costs will either continue to fall or at least remain quiescent.
Moreover, price-cost margins are at high levels (as can be seen in the strong growth of profits), providing an additional cushion for absorbing any inflation pressures that may emerge on the cost side.
These forces should largely offset the effects on core consumer price inflation of the rising costs of raw materials--the byproduct of the gathering global recovery and continuing rapid growth in East Asia--and last year's decline in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
As I discussed in some detail in a speech earlier this year (Bernanke, 2004a), the direct effects of commodity price increases and a depreciating dollar on inflation at the consumer level are generally small.
This modest direct impact reflects the small share of total costs accounted for by raw materials and imported inputs as well as the fact that a portion of cost increases tends to be absorbed in producers' margins.
In thinking about the implications of higher commodity prices for inflation, one should also make the distinction between a one-time rise in commodity prices and an ongoing process of commodity price inflation.
Commodity prices can only contribute to inflation at the consumer level when they are rapidly rising.
Commodity prices may well remain high in an absolute sense over the next few years because of the high global demand for raw materials.
Yet if the rate of increase in commodity prices slows significantly, as is implied for example by futures prices, the effect of commodity prices on the rate of inflation will eventually become negligible.
Similarly, dollar depreciation contributes to inflation only to the extent that it is ongoing; we cannot predict whether last year's decline in the dollar will continue, of course, but so far this year it has not.
In describing what I consider to be the most likely scenario for inflation, I do not wish to convey an unwarranted degree of certainty.
Like employment, inflation is difficult to forecast.
One factor that may be of great importance in inflation determination but can be particularly hard to gauge is the state of the public's inflation expectations (Poole, 2004).
For example, wages and prices that are set for some period in the future will of necessity embody the inflation expectations of the parties to the negotiation; increases in expected inflation will thus tend to promote greater actual inflation.
More subtly, my conclusion that the effects on inflation of transitory changes in commodity prices or in the value of the dollar tend to dissipate in the longer run depends on the assumption that the public's inflation expectations are well anchored.
If expectations are not well tied down, inflationary impulses that are in themselves transitory may become embedded in expectations and hence affect inflation in the longer term.
Therefore, an essential prerequisite for controlling inflation is controlling inflation expectations.
Assessing the current state of inflation expectations in the United States is not entirely straightforward.
Survey measures of near-term inflation expectations, including those based on interviews of professional forecasters, individual consumers, and firm managers, have in some cases ticked up slightly in recent months, though long-term inflation expectations appear stable.
The spread between the yields on Treasury debt and inflation-indexed Treasury securities of similar maturity, known as the breakeven inflation rate and conventionally treated as an indicator of expected inflation, has also risen.
From a policy perspective, a difficulty with all these measures is that they reflect expectations of headline inflation rather than the core inflation measures usually emphasized in the monetary policy context.
Headline inflation has of course been significantly affected by the recent surge in energy prices.
The breakeven inflation rate derived from indexed Treasury securities has additional problems as a measure of expected inflation.
As I discussed in a recent speech (Bernanke, 2004b), breakeven inflation may differ substantially from the market's true expectation of inflation because of possibly time-varying risk and liquidity premiums.
I will discuss inflation expectations further in the context of monetary policy, to which I turn next.
Monetary Policy The federal funds rate stands at a historically low level of 1 percent, and the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has declared its intention to be "patient in removing policy accommodation."
As a number of my FOMC colleagues have noted in various public venues, inevitably the funds rate will have to return to a more normal level.
What considerations should the Committee keep in mind as it plans this normalization process?
Before addressing this question, I would like to point out that, in an appropriately broad sense, monetary conditions in the United States are already in the process of normalizing.
I base this statement on my view that the stance of monetary policy should be judged not only by the current setting of the federal funds rate but also by the level of rates that are tied directly or indirectly to expectations about the future path of monetary policy, of which the yields on Treasury securities are the leading examples.
In part because of the FOMC's communication strategy, which has linked the future stance of policy to the level of inflation and the extent of slack in resource utilization, market interest rates have generally responded continuously and in a stabilizing manner to economic developments.
The March employment report, which cited an unexpectedly high rate of job creation, provides a recent example.
Treasury yields rose sharply on its release as market participants traced out the report's presumed implications for monetary policy.
Mortgage rates, corporate bond rates, and other yields and asset prices moved in sympathy, with important effects on the cost of borrowing and hence, presumably, on aggregate demand.
For practical purposes, therefore, monetary conditions tightened significantly the day of the March employment report, notwithstanding the fact that the federal funds rate itself was unchanged.
This episode illustrates both the power and the importance of clear communication by monetary policymakers about their objectives and their evaluation of economic conditions.
With respect to future decisions about the policy rate, for me two considerations are most relevant: first, the degree of confidence one can place in the sustainability of the economic expansion and, second, the evolution of inflation and inflation expectations.
As I have indicated, the economic expansion is showing increasing signs of being both strong and self-sustaining.
However, to my mind, some uncertainty about that sustainability remains, arising primarily from the slow recovery of the labor market.
Indeed, if one takes into account the long delay between the official recession trough and the trough in employment, the labor market today remains at what effectively is an early stage of its normal cyclical expansion.
Although the recent improvement in employment is encouraging, from the data in hand it is not yet clear that employers have overcome their reluctance to hire at a normal pace.
Additional confirmation that the recovery in the job market is both sustainable and quickening would be most welcome.
Regarding inflation, as I noted earlier, the economic fundamentals appear consistent with core inflation's remaining under control, in the general range of 1 to 2 percent.
In particular, I see no indication that the U.S. economy is in imminent danger of overheating, productivity growth is keeping the lid on labor costs, and the effects on inflation of the increases in commodity prices and the decline in the dollar to date, which are likely to be small in any event, may well have dissipated a year from now.
As I have acknowledged, however, there are risks to my relatively sanguine inflation forecast.
In particular, a rise in the public's expectations of inflation, whether "justified" by underlying forces or not, may put upward pressure on the actual rate of inflation.
Moreover, expectations of inflation can themselves be destabilizing, as when an "inflation scare" in the bond market inappropriately raises long-term yields, with adverse effects for the real economy.
To avoid instability in expected inflation, and the volatility in actual inflation, output, and employment that might result, I believe that the Federal Reserve should maintain at all costs its hard-won credibility for keeping the inflation rate low and stable.
That involves, at a minimum, formulating policy with a close eye to indicators of inflation and inflation expectations.
More generally, as I have suggested in earlier talks, I believe that the FOMC's credibility and clarity would be enhanced if it announced the inflation range with which it would be comfortable in the medium term (Bernanke, 2003a, 2003b).
In particular, policy would be both more coherent and more predictable if FOMC members shared an explicit common objective for inflation at the medium-term horizon.
To conclude, monetary policy is now in a transition phase.
That short-term interest rates must eventually be normalized is a given.

