I will offer some conclusions about what I believe has been learned thus far, though I suspect, as is so often the case, the passing of time, further study, and reflection will deepen our understanding of these developments.
This is a personal statement; I am not speaking for my current colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the many others with whom I have served over these many years.1 * * * The tightening of monetary policy by the Federal Reserve in 1979, then led by my predecessor Paul Volcker, ultimately broke the back of price acceleration in the United States, ushering in a two-decade long decline in inflation that eventually brought us to the current state of price stability.
The fall in inflation over this period has been global in scope, and arguably beyond the expectations of even the most optimistic inflation fighters.
I have little doubt that an unrelenting focus of monetary policy on achieving price stability has been the principal contributor to disinflation.
Indeed, the notion, advanced by Milton Friedman more than thirty years ago, that inflation is everywhere and always a monetary phenomenon is no longer a controversial proposition in the profession.
But the size and geographic extent of the decline in inflation raises the question of whether other forces have been at work as well.
I am increasingly of the view that, at a minimum, monetary policy in the last two decades has been operating in an environment particularly conducive to the pursuit of price stability.
The principal features of this environment included (1) increased political support for stable prices, which was the consequence of, and reaction to, the unprecedented peacetime inflation in the 1970s, (2) globalization, which unleashed powerful new forces of competition, and (3) an acceleration of productivity, which at least for a time held down cost pressures.
I believe we at the Fed, to our credit, did gradually come to recognize the structural economic changes that we were living through and accordingly altered our understanding of the key parameters of the economic system and our policy stance.
The central banks of other industrialized countries have grappled with many of the same issues.
But as we lived through it, there was much uncertainty about the evolving structure of the economy and about the influence of monetary policy.
Despite those uncertainties, the trauma of the 1970s was still so vivid throughout the 1980s that preventing a return to accelerating prices was the unvarying focus of our efforts during those years.
In recognition of the lag in monetary policy's impact on economic activity, a preemptive response to the potential for building inflationary pressures was made an important feature of policy.
As a consequence, this approach elevated forecasting to an even more prominent place in policy deliberations.
* * * After an almost uninterrupted stint of easing from the summer of 1984 through the spring of 1987, the Fed again began to lean against increasing inflationary pressures, which were in part the indirect result of rapidly rising stock prices.
We had recognized the risk of an adverse reaction in a stock market that had recently experienced a steep run-up--indeed, we actively engaged in contingency planning against that possibility.
In the event, the crash in October 1987 was far more traumatic than any of the possible scenarios we had identified.
Previous planning was only marginally useful in that episode.
We operated essentially in a crisis mode, responding with an immediate and massive injection of liquidity to help stabilize highly volatile financial markets.
However, most of our stabilization efforts were directed at keeping the payments system functioning and markets open.
The concern over the possible fallout on economic activity from so sharp a stock price decline kept us easing into early 1988.
But the economy weathered that shock reasonably well, and our easing extended perhaps longer than hindsight has indicated was necessary.
That period was followed by a preemptive tightening that brought the federal funds rate close to 10 percent by early 1989.
In the summer of that year, we sensed enough softening of activity to warrant beginning a series of rate reductions.
However, the weakening of demand already under way, some pullback of credit by lenders, and the spike in oil prices associated with Iraq's invasion of Kuwait were sufficient to produce a marked contraction of activity in the fall of 1990.
But perhaps aided by our preemptive action, the recession was, to then, the mildest in postwar history.
However, the recovery also was more modest than usual, in large measure because of the notable financial "headwinds" that confronted businesses.
Those headwinds were primarily generated by the constriction of credit in response to major losses at banks, associated with real-estate and foreign lending, coupled with a crisis in the savings and loan industry that had its origins in a serious maturity mismatch as interest rates rose.
With their access to managed funds threatened and the quality of their loan portfolio--and hence their capital--uncertain, these depositories were most reluctant to lend.
Policy eased gradually but persistently to counter the effects of these developments, with the funds rate falling to 3 percent by September 1992, its lowest level since the early 1960s.
The uptilt to the term structure of interest rates in a generally low interest rate environment restored bank profitability and, eventually, bank capital.
The credit crunch slowly lifted.
By early 1994, as the headwinds of financial restraint abated, it became clear that underlying price pressures were again building.
If we had left those pressures unchecked, we would have put at risk some of the hard-won gains that had been achieved over the preceding decade and a half.
So, starting from a real federal funds rate that was close to zero, a preemptive tightening was initiated.
The resulting rise in the funds rate of 300 basis points over twelve months apparently defused those nascent inflationary pressures.
Though economic activity hesitated in early 1995, it soon steadied, confirming the achievement of a historically elusive soft landing.
The success of that period set up two powerful expectations that were to influence developments over the subsequent decade.
One was the expectation that inflation could be controlled over the business cycle and that price stability was an achievable objective.
The second expectation, in part a consequence of more stable inflation, was that overall economic volatility had been reduced and would likely remain lower than it had previously.
Of course, these new developments brought new challenges.
In particular, the prospect that a necessary cyclical adjustment was now behind us fostered increasing levels of optimism, which were manifested in a fall in bond risk spreads and a rise in stock prices.
The associated decline in the cost of equity capital further spurred already developing increases in capital investment and productivity growth, both of which broadened impressively in the latter part of the 1990s.
The rise in structural productivity growth was not obvious in the official data on gross product per hour worked until later in the decade, but precursors had emerged earlier.
The pickup in new bookings and order backlogs for high-tech capital goods in 1993 seemed incongruous given the sluggish economic environment at the time.
Plant managers apparently were reacting to what they perceived to be elevated prospective rates of return on the newer technologies, a judgment that was confirmed as orders and profits continued to increase through 1994 and 1995.
Moreover, even though hourly labor compensation and profit margins were rising, prices were being contained, implying increasing growth in output per hour.2 As a consequence of the improving trend in structural productivity growth that was apparent from 1995 forward, we at the Fed were able to be much more accommodative to the rise in economic growth than our past experiences would have deemed prudent.
We were motivated, in part, by the view that the evident structural economic changes rendered suspect, at best, the prevailing notion in the early 1990s of an elevated and reasonably stable NAIRU.
Those views were reinforced as inflation continued to fall in the context of a declining unemployment rate that by 2000 had dipped below 4 percent in the United States for the first time in three decades.
Notions that prevailed for a time in the 1970s and early 1980s that even high single-digit inflation did not measurably impede economic growth were gradually abandoned as the evidence of significant benefits of low inflation became increasingly persuasive.
Moreover, the variance of GDP growth markedly lessened as inflation tumbled from its double-digit high in the early 1980s.
To preserve these benefits, we engaged in our most recent preemptive tightening in early 1999 that brought the funds rate to 6-1/2 percent by May 2000.
Our goal of price stability was achieved by most analysts' definition by mid-2003.
Unstinting and largely preemptive efforts over two decades had finally paid off.
Throughout the period, a key objective has been to ensure that our response to incipient changes in inflation was forceful enough.
As John Taylor has emphasized, in the face of an incipient increase in inflation, nominal interest rates must move up more than one-for-one.3 * * * Perhaps the greatest irony of the past decade is that the gradually unfolding success against inflation may well have contributed to the stock price bubble of the latter part of the 1990s.4 Looking back on those years, it is evident that technology-driven increases in productivity growth imparted significant upward momentum to expectations of earnings growth and, accordingly, to stock prices.5 At the same time, an environment of increasing macroeconomic stability reduced perceptions of risk.
In any event, Fed policymakers were confronted with forces that none of us had previously encountered.
Aside from the then-recent experience of Japan, only remote historical episodes gave us clues to the appropriate stance for policy under such conditions.
The sharp rise in stock prices and their subsequent fall were, thus, an especial challenge to the Federal Reserve.
It is far from obvious that bubbles, even if identified early, can be preempted at lower cost than a substantial economic contraction and possible financial destabilization--the very outcomes we would be seeking to avoid.
In fact, our experience over the past two decades suggests that a moderate monetary tightening that deflates stock prices without substantial effect on economic activity has often been associated with subsequent increases in the level of stock prices.6 Arguably, markets that pass that type of stress test are presumed particularly resilient.
The notion that a well-timed incremental tightening could have been calibrated to prevent the late 1990s bubble while preserving economic stability is almost surely an illusion.7 Instead of trying to contain a putative bubble by drastic actions with largely unpredictable consequences, we chose, as we noted in our mid-1999 congressional testimony, to focus on policies "to mitigate the fallout when it occurs and, hopefully, ease the transition to the next expansion.
"8 * * * During 2001, in the aftermath of the bursting of the bubble and the acts of terrorism in September 2001, the federal funds rate was lowered 4-3/4 percentage points.
Subsequently, another 75 basis points were pared, bringing the rate by June 2003 to its current 1 percent, the lowest level in 45 years.
We were able to be unusually aggressive in the initial stages of the recession of 2001 because both inflation and inflation expectations were low and stable.
We thought we needed to be, and could be, forceful in 2002 and 2003 as well because, with demand weak, inflation risks had become two-sided for the first time in forty years.
There appears to be enough evidence, at least tentatively, to conclude that our strategy of addressing the bubble's consequences rather than the bubble itself has been successful.
Despite the stock market plunge, terrorist attacks, corporate scandals, and wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, we experienced an exceptionally mild recession--even milder than that of a decade earlier.
As I discuss later, much of the ability of the U.S. economy to absorb these sequences of shocks resulted from notably improved structural flexibility.
But highly aggressive monetary ease was doubtless also a significant contributor to stability.9 * * * The Federal Reserve's experiences over the past two decades make it clear that uncertainty is not just a pervasive feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape.
The term "uncertainty" is meant here to encompass both "Knightian uncertainty," in which the probability distribution of outcomes is unknown, and "risk," in which uncertainty of outcomes is delimited by a known probability distribution.
In practice, one is never quite sure what type of uncertainty one is dealing with in real time, and it may be best to think of a continuum ranging from well-defined risks to the truly unknown.
As a consequence, the conduct of monetary policy in the United States has come to involve, at its core, crucial elements of risk management.
This conceptual framework emphasizes understanding as much as possible the many sources of risk and uncertainty that policymakers face, quantifying those risks when possible, and assessing the costs associated with each of the risks.
In essence, the risk management approach to monetary policymaking is an application of Bayesian decisionmaking.
This framework also entails devising, in light of those risks, a strategy for policy directed at maximizing the probabilities of achieving over time our goals of price stability and the maximum sustainable economic growth that we associate with it.
In designing strategies to meet our policy objectives, we have drawn on the work of analysts, both inside and outside the Fed, who over the past half century have devoted much effort to improving our understanding of the economy and its monetary transmission mechanism.
A critical result has been the identification of a relatively small set of key relationships that, taken together, provide a useful approximation of our economy's dynamics.
Such an approximation underlies the statistical models that we at the Federal Reserve employ to assess the likely influence of our policy decisions.
However, despite extensive efforts to capture and quantify what we perceive as the key macroeconomic relationships, our knowledge about many of the important linkages is far from complete and, in all likelihood, will always remain so.
Every model, no matter how detailed or how well designed, conceptually and empirically, is a vastly simplified representation of the world that we experience with all its intricacies on a day-to-day basis.
Given our inevitably incomplete knowledge about key structural aspects of an ever-changing economy and the sometimes asymmetric costs or benefits of particular outcomes, a central bank needs to consider not only the most likely future path for the economy but also the distribution of possible outcomes about that path.
The decisionmakers then need to reach a judgment about the probabilities, costs, and benefits of the various possible outcomes under alternative choices for policy.
A policy action that is calculated to be optimal based on a simulation of one particular model may not, in fact, be optimal once the full extent of the risks surrounding the most likely path is taken into account.
In general, different policies will exhibit different degrees of robustness with respect to the true underlying structure of the economy.
For example, policy A might be judged as best advancing the policymakers' objectives, conditional on a particular model of the economy, but might also be seen as having relatively severe adverse consequences if the true structure of the economy turns out to be other than the one assumed.
On the other hand, policy B might be somewhat less effective in advancing the policy objectives under the assumed baseline model but might be relatively benign in the event that the structure of the economy turns out to differ from the baseline.
A year ago, these considerations inclined Federal Reserve policymakers toward an easier stance of policy aimed at limiting the risk of deflation even though baseline forecasts from most conventional models at that time did not project deflation; that is, we chose a policy that, in a world of perfect certainty, would have been judged to be too loose.
As this episode illustrates, policy practitioners operating under a risk-management paradigm may, at times, be led to undertake actions intended to provide insurance against especially adverse outcomes.
Following the Russian debt default in the autumn of 1998, for example, the FOMC eased policy despite our perception that the economy was expanding at a satisfactory pace and that, even without a policy initiative, it was likely to continue doing so.10 We eased policy because we were concerned about the low-probability risk that the default might trigger events that would severely disrupt domestic and international financial markets, with outsized adverse feedback to the performance of the U.S. economy.
The product of a low-probability event and a potentially severe outcome was judged a more serious threat to economic performance than the higher inflation that might ensue in the more probable scenario.
That possibility of higher inflation caused us little concern at the time, largely because increased productivity growth was resulting in only limited increases in unit labor costs and heightened competition, driven by globalization, was thwarting employers' ability to pass through those limited cost increases into prices.
Given the potential consequences of the Russian default, the benefits of the unusual policy action were judged to outweigh its costs.
Such a cost-benefit analysis is an ongoing part of monetary policy decisionmaking and causes us to tip more toward monetary ease when a contractionary event, such as the Russian default, seems especially likely or the costs associated with it seem especially high.
The 1998 liquidity crisis and the crises associated with the stock market crash of 1987 and the terrorism of September 2001 prompted the type of massive ease that has been the historic mandate of a central bank.
Such crises are precipitated by the efforts of market participants to convert illiquid assets into cash.
When confronted with uncertainty, especially Knightian uncertainty, human beings invariably attempt to disengage from medium to long-term commitments in favor of safety and liquidity.
Because economies, of necessity, are net long--that is, have net real assets--attempts to flee these assets cause prices of equity assets to fall, in some cases dramatically.
In the crisis that emerged in the autumn of 1998, pressures extended beyond equity markets.
Credit-risk spreads widened materially and investors put a particularly high value on liquidity, as evidenced by the extraordinarily wide yield gaps that emerged between on-the-run and off-the-run U.S. Treasuries.
The immediate response on the part of the central bank to such financial implosions must be to inject large quantities of liquidity--or as Walter Bagehot put it, describing such policies of the Bank of England more than a century ago, in a panic the Bank should lend at very high rates of interest "to all that bring good securities quickly, freely, and readily.
"11 This was perhaps an early articulation of a crisis risk management policy for a central bank.
* * * The economic world in which we function is best described by a structure whose parameters are continuously changing.
The channels of monetary policy, consequently, are changing in tandem.
An ongoing challenge for the Federal Reserve--indeed, for any central bank--is to operate in a way that does not depend on a fixed economic structure based on historically average coefficients.
We often fit simple models only because we cannot estimate a continuously changing set of parameters without vastly more observations than are currently available to us.
Moreover, we recognize that the simple linear functions underlying most of our econometric structures may not hold outside the range in which adequate economic observations exist.
For example, it is difficult to have much confidence in the ability of models fit to the data of the moderate inflations of the postwar period to accurately predict what the behavior of the economy would be in an environment of aggregate price deflation.
In pursuing a risk-management approach to policy, we must confront the fact that only a limited number of risks can be quantified with any confidence.
And even these risks are generally quantifiable only if we accept the assumption that the future will, at least in some important respects, resemble the past.
Policymakers often have to act, or choose not to act, even though we may not fully understand the full range of possible outcomes, let alone each possible outcome's likelihood.
As a result, risk management often involves significant judgment as we evaluate the risks of different events and the probability that our actions will alter those risks.
For such judgment, policymakers have needed to reach beyond models to broader--though less mathematically precise--hypotheses about how the world works.
For example, inferences about how market participants and, hence, the economy might respond to a monetary policy initiative may need to be drawn from evidence about past behavior during a period only roughly comparable to the current situation.
Some critics have argued that such an approach to policy is too undisciplined--judgmental, seemingly discretionary, and difficult to explain.
The Federal Reserve, they conclude, should attempt to be more formal in its operations by tying its actions solely, or in the weaker paradigm, largely, to the prescriptions of a simple policy rule.
Indeed, rules that relate the setting of the federal funds rate to the deviations of output and inflation from their respective targets, in some configurations, do seem to capture the broad contours of what we did over the past decade and a half.
And the prescriptions of formal rules can, in fact, serve as helpful adjuncts to policy, as many of the proponents of these rules have suggested.
But at crucial points, like those in our recent policy history--the stock market crash of 1987, the crises of 1997-98, and the events that followed September 2001--simple rules will be inadequate as either descriptions or prescriptions for policy.
Moreover, such rules suffer from much of the same fixed-coefficient difficulties we have with our large-scale models.
To be sure, sensible policymaking can be accomplished only with the aid of a rigorous analytic structure.
A rule does provide a benchmark against which to assess emerging developments.
However, any rule capable of encompassing every possible contingency would lose a key aspect of its attractiveness: simplicity.
On the other hand, no simple rule could possibly describe the policy action to be taken in every contingency and thus provide a satisfactory substitute for an approach based on the principles of risk management.
As I indicated earlier, policy has worked off a risk-management paradigm in which the risk and cost-benefit analyses depend on forecasts of probabilities developed from large macromodels, numerous submodels, and judgments based on less mathematically precise regimens.
Such judgments, by their nature, are based on bits and pieces of history that cannot formally be associated with an analysis of variance.
Yet, there is information in those bits and pieces.
For example, while we have been unable to readily construct a variable that captures the apparent increased degree of flexibility in the United States or the global economy, there has been too much circumstantial evidence of this critically important trend to ignore its existence.
Increased flexibility is a likely source of changing structural coefficients.
Our problem is not, as is sometimes alleged, the complexity of our policymaking process, but the far greater complexity of a world economy whose underlying linkages appear to be continuously evolving.
Our response to that continuous evolution has been disciplined by the Bayesian type of decisionmaking in which we have engaged.
* * * While all, no doubt, would prefer that it were otherwise, there is no way to dismiss what has to be obvious to every monetary policymaker: The success of monetary policy depends importantly on the quality of forecasting.
The ability to gauge risks implies some judgment about how current economic imbalances will ultimately play out.
Thus, both econometric and qualitative models need to be continually tested.
The first signs that a relationship may have changed is usually the emergence of events that seem inconsistent with our hypotheses of the way the economic world is supposed to behave.
The anomalous rise in high-tech capital goods orders in 1993, to which I alluded earlier, is one such example.
The credit crunch of the early 1990s is another.
The emergence of inflation targeting in recent years is an interesting development in this regard.
As practiced, it emphasizes forecasts, but within a more rule-like structure that skews monetary policy toward inflation containment as the primary goal.
Indeed, its early applications were in high-inflation countries where discretionary monetary policy fell into disrepute.
Inflation targeting often originated as a fairly simple structure concentrating solely on inflation outcomes, but it has evolved into more-discretionary forms requiring complex judgments for implementation.
Indeed, this evolution has gone so far that the actual practice of monetary policy by inflation-targeting central banks now closely resembles the practice of those central banks, such as the European Central Bank, the Bank of Japan, and the Federal Reserve, that have not chosen to adopt that paradigm.
In practice, most central banks, at least those not bound by an exchange rate peg, behave in roughly the same way.
They seek price stability as their long-term goal and, accounting for the lag in monetary policy, calibrate the setting of the policy rate accordingly.
Central banks generally appear to have embraced a common model of the channels through which monetary policy functions, although the specifics and emphasis given to those channels vary according to our particular circumstances.
All banks ease when economic conditions ease and tighten when economic conditions tighten, even if in differing degrees, regardless of whether they are guided by formal or informal inflation targets.
As yet unresolved is whether the mere announcement that a central bank intends to engage in inflation targeting increases the credibility of the central bank's inclination to maintain price stability and, hence, assists in the anchoring of inflation expectations.
The Bank of England's recent experiences may be encouraging in this regard.
But, presumably, we will not know for sure the significance of formal inflation targeting as a tool until the world economy is subjected to shocks of sufficient magnitude to assess the differential performance of those who do not employ formally announced inflation targets.
To date, inflation has fallen for formal targeters, but it has fallen for others as well.
* * * Under the rubric of risk management are a number of specific issues that we at the Fed had to address over the past decade and a half and that will likely resurface to confront future monetary policymakers.
Most prominent is the appropriate role of asset prices in policy.
In addition to the narrower issue of product price stability, asset prices will remain high on the research agenda of central banks for years to come.
As the ratios of gross liabilities and gross assets to GDP continue to rise, owing to expanding domestic and international financial intermediation, the visibility of asset prices relative to product prices will itself rise.
There is little dispute that the prices of stocks, bonds, homes, real estate, and exchange rates affect GDP.
But most central banks have chosen, at least to date, not to view asset prices as targets of policy, but as economic variables to be considered through the prism of the policy's ultimate objective.
* * * As the transcripts of FOMC meetings attest, making monetary policy is an especially humbling activity.
In hindsight, the paths of inflation, real output, stock prices and exchange rates may have seemed preordained, but no such insight existed as we experienced it at the time.
In fact, uncertainty characterized virtually every meeting, and, as the transcripts show, our ability to anticipate was limited.
From time to time the FOMC made decisions, some to move and some not to move, that we came to regret.
Yet, during the last quarter century, policymakers managed to defuse dangerous inflationary forces and dealt with the consequences of a stock market crash, a large asset price bubble, and a series of liquidity crises.
These events did not distract us from the pursuit and eventual achievement of price stability and the greater economic stability that goes with it.
As we confront the many unspecifiable dangers that lie ahead, the marked improvement in the degree of flexibility and resilience exhibited by our economy in recent years should afford us considerable comfort.12 Assuming that it will persist, the trend toward increased flexibility implies that an ever-greater part of the resolution of economic imbalances will occur through the actions of business firms and households.
Less will be required from the risk-laden initiatives of monetary policymakers.
Each generation of policymakers has had to grapple with a changing portfolio of problems.
So while we eagerly draw on the experiences of our predecessors, we can be assured that we will confront different problems in the future.

Montagu Norman, the Governor of the Bank of England for a quarter of a century after the First World War and a highly influential figure in his time in central banking circles, was notorious for his reclusiveness, both personal and professional.
According to his biographer, Norman lived by the maxim, "Never explain, never excuse" (Boyle, 1967, p. 217).
Norman was hardly unique.
Central bankers long believed that a certain "mystique" attached to their activities; that making monetary policy was an arcane and esoteric art that should be left solely to the initiates; and that letting the public into the discussion would only usurp the prerogatives of insiders and degrade the effectiveness of policy.
In contrast to this tradition of secrecy, central banks around the world have become noticeably more open and transparent over the past fifteen years or so.
Policymaking committees have adopted various mechanisms to enhance their communication with the public, including more informative policy announcements, post-meeting press conferences, expanded testimony before the legislature, the release of the minutes of policy meetings, and the regular publication of reports on monetary policy and the economy.
This increased openness is a welcome development, for many reasons.
Perhaps most important, as public servants whose policy actions affect the lives of every citizen, central bankers have a basic responsibility to give the public full and compelling explanations of the rationales for those actions.
Besides satisfying the principle of democratic accountability, a more open policymaking process is also likely to lead to better policy decisions, because engagement with an informed public provides central bankers with useful feedback in the form of outside views and analyses.
Yet another benefit of full and timely release of information about policy decisions and their rationales is a reduced risk that market-sensitive information will dribble out through inappropriate channels, giving unfair advantage to some financial market participants.
Admittedly, for many central banks, including the Federal Reserve, progress toward greater transparency has come in halting steps and not without trepidation.
For example, the decision to announce changes in the target for the federal funds rate immediately after meetings of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) was implemented only in phases and after considerable soul-searching by FOMC members.
In retrospect, however, I think that most central bankers, both in the United States and abroad, would agree that greater openness has been beneficial to central banks as institutions and for the advancement of their policy objectives.
Although the presumption today is that--absent compelling reasons to the contrary--central banks should strive for transparency, some basic questions about what, how, and to what end central banks should communicate with the public remain decidedly open.
In my talk today I will put aside broader considerations such as democratic accountability and consider these questions as they bear on the ability of central banks to make monetary policy more effective and to improve macroeconomic performance.
Before proceeding, I should emphasize that the views I will express today are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Why Central Bank Communication Matters for Policy Effectiveness Can central bank talk--Fedspeak, in the vernacular of the U.S. media and financial markets--make monetary policy more effective and improve economic outcomes?
To see why communication may be an integral part of good monetary policymaking, recall that the Federal Reserve directly controls only a single short-term interest rate, the overnight federal funds rate.
Relative to the enormous size of global financial markets, the market for federal funds--the market in which commercial banks borrow and lend reserves on a short-term basis--is insignificant.
Control of the federal funds rate is therefore useful only to the extent that it can be used as a lever to influence more important asset prices and yields--stock prices, government and corporate bond yields, mortgage rates--which in turn allow the Fed to affect the overall course of the economy.
Of course, basic financial theory implies that a link does exist between short-term interest rates, such as the federal funds rate, and longer-term rates, such as Treasury bond yields and mortgage rates.
In particular, longer-term yields should depend in part on market expectations about the future course of short-term rates.
For example, with the current setting of the funds rate held constant, any arriving news that leads bond market participants to expect higher future values of the funds rate will tend to raise bond yields and lower bond prices.
The link between long-term bond yields and market expectations of future monetary policy actions is familiar to all financial-market participants and has been well supported by recent empirical research.
For example, Antulio Bomfim has demonstrated that the shape of the term structure of Treasury yields can be effectively described by a two-factor model, in which the first factor corresponds to the current setting of the funds rate and the second factor closely approximates medium-term monetary policy expectations (Bomfim, 2003).
The fact that market expectations of future settings of the federal funds rate are at least as important as the current value of the funds rate in determining key interest rates such as bond and mortgage rates suggests a potentially important role for central bank communication: If effective communication can help financial markets develop more accurate expectations of the likely future course of the funds rate, policy will be more effective (in a precise sense that I will explain further soon), and risk in financial markets should be reduced as well.
It is worth emphasizing that the predictability of monetary policy actions has both short-run and long-run aspects.
A central bank may, through various means, improve the market's ability to anticipate its next policy move.
Improving short-term predictability is not unimportant, because it may reduce risk premiums in asset markets and influence shorter-term yields.
But signaling the likely action at the next meeting is not sufficient for effective policymaking.
Because the values of long-term assets are affected by the whole trajectory of expected short-term rates, it is even more vital that information relevant to estimating that trajectory be communicated.
As I will argue later, this can usually be done only by providing information about the central bank's objectives, assessment of the economy, and policy strategy.
Communication, Asymmetric Information, and Learning Ideally, what should central bank communication try to achieve?
In an important analysis of the issue of central bank transparency, my FOMC colleague William Poole laid out a benchmark case in which the potential benefits of communication would be fully realized (Poole, 2003).
In this benchmark case, the central bank has well-defined objectives and pursues regular and systematic policies consistent with those objectives.
More important for our purposes, in this idealized world, financial markets are highly efficient and well informed.
In particular, financial-market participants have access to all the information that the central bank uses in making policy decisions.
Let us call the premise that the central bank has no significant information advantage over the private sector the assumption of symmetric information.
If the conditions of systematic policymaking, financial-market efficiency, and symmetric information all held, then one might hope that the economy would converge to a rational expectations equilibrium, in which participants in financial markets would need only to analyze incoming, publicly available economic data to make efficient forecasts of future Federal Reserve actions.1 In this benchmark case, there would be no marginal benefit to central bank communication, beyond whatever was necessary to support this equilibrium in the first place.
Of course, to describe this idealized benchmark case is to recognize that it is at best an approximate description of the economy in which we live.
In practice, financial-market participants generally do not have as much information as monetary policymakers do about a number of key inputs to policymaking, including the policymakers' own objectives, their (possibly implicit) model of the economy and the monetary transmission mechanism, their assessment of the economic situation (including both forecasts and the risks to the forecast), and their policy strategy.
To the extent that this asymmetry of information between the central bank and the financial markets is quantitatively important--and I will present some evidence on this point shortly--financial markets will not price bonds and other assets efficiently (relative to the information possessed by the central bank), and scope may exist for central bank communication to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy and the overall performance of the economy.
A skeptic might argue that noise and other sources of pricing inefficiency pervade the financial markets, so that improving the predictability of monetary policy is of limited importance in practice, except perhaps to a few brokers and traders.
To the contrary, there is good reason to believe that information asymmetries between the central bank and financial markets may matter a great deal for economic welfare.
A theoretical basis for this view is provided by the lively recent literature on adaptive learning and monetary policy.
This work has shown that, when the public does not know but instead must estimate the central bank's reaction function and other economic relationships using observed data, we have no guarantee that the economy will converge--even in infinite time--to the optimal rational expectations equilibrium.2 In general, the problem is that the public's learning process itself affects the behavior of the economy--for example, as when expectational errors by bond traders affect interest rates and thus a wide range of economic decisions.
The feedback effect of learning on the economy, this literature has shown, can in principle lead to unstable or indeterminate outcomes.
More generally, the dynamic behavior of an economy with asymmetric information and learning may be radically different from the behavior of the same economy in the optimal rational expectations equilibrium.

The very low levels of interest rates in Japan, Switzerland, and the United States in recent years have stimulated much interesting research on this question, and some has been applied in the field.
Moreover, their minds concentrated by the possibility of having the policy rate pinned at zero, central bankers have responded flexibly, making changes in their operating procedures and communications strategies.
Our purpose in this paper is to give a brief progress report and overview of current thinking on the conduct of monetary policy when short-term interest rates are very low or even zero.1 Monetary policy works for the most part through financial markets.
Central bank actions are designed in the first instance to influence asset prices and yields, which in turn affect economic decisions and thus the evolution of the economy.
When the short-term policy rate is at or near zero, the conventional means of effecting monetary ease--lowering the target for the policy rate--is no longer feasible, but monetary policy is not impotent.
In this paper we will discuss three alternative (but potentially complementary) monetary strategies for stimulating the economy that do not involve changing the current value of the policy rate.
Specifically, these alternatives involve (1) providing assurance to financial investors that short rates will be lower in the future than they currently expect, (2) changing the relative supplies of securities (such as Treasury notes and bonds) in the marketplace by shifting the composition of the central bank's balance sheet, and (3) increasing the size of the central bank's balance sheet beyond the level needed to set the short-term policy rate at zero ("quantitative easing").
In the final section, we briefly discuss the macroeconomic costs and benefits of very low interest rates, an issue that bears on the question of whether the central bank should take the policy rate all the way to zero before undertaking some of the alternatives we describe.
I.
Shaping Interest-Rate Expectations The pricing of long-lived assets, such as long-term bonds and equities, depends on the entire expected future path of short-term interest rates as well as on the current short-term rate.
Prices and yields of long-lived assets are important determinants of economic behavior because they affect incentives to spend, save, and invest.
Thus, a central bank may hope to affect financial markets and economic activity by influencing financial market participants' expectations of future short-term rates.
Important recent research has examined this potential channel of influence in fully articulated models based on optimizing behavior; see Michael Woodford (2003, chapter 6), Lars Svensson (2001), and Gauti Eggertson and Woodford (2003).
This literature suggests that, even with the overnight nominal interest rate at zero, a central bank can impart additional stimulus by offering some form of commitment to the public to keep the short rate low for a longer period than previously expected.
This commitment, if credible, should lower yields throughout the term structure and support other asset prices.
In principle, the central bank's policy commitment could take either of two forms: unconditional and conditional.
An unconditional commitment is a pledge by the central bank to hold short-term rates at a low level for a fixed period of calendar time.
In this case, additional easing would take the form of lengthening the period of policy commitment.
However, given the many shocks that the economy is heir to, as well as other imponderables that affect the outlook, a policymaking committee might understandably be reluctant to tie its hands by making an unconditional promise, no matter how nuanced, about policy actions far into the future.
An alternative strategy is to make a conditional policy commitment, one that links the duration of promised policies not to the calendar but to the evolution of economic conditions.
For example, policy ease could be promised until the committee observes sustained economic growth, substantial progress in trimming economic slack, or a period of inflation above a specified floor.
In practice, central banks appear to appreciate the importance of influencing market expectations about future policy.
For example, in May 2001, with its policy rate virtually at zero, the Bank of Japan promised that it would keep its policy rate at zero for as long as the economy experienced deflation--a conditional policy commitment.
More recently, the Bank of Japan has been more explicit about the conditions under which it would begin to raise rates; for example, it has been specified that a change from deflation to inflation that is perceived to be temporary will not provoke a tightening.2 In the United States, the August 2003 statement of the Federal Open Market Committee that "policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period" is another example of commitment.
The close association of this statement with the Committee's expressed concerns about "unwelcome disinflation" implied that this commitment was conditioned on the assessment of the economy.
The conditional nature of the commitment was sharpened in the Committee's December statement, which explicitly linked continuing policy accommodation to the low level of inflation and the slack in resource use.3 More generally, in recent years central banks have devoted enormous effort to improving their communications and transparency; a major benefit of such efforts should be a greater ability to align market expectations of policy with the policymaking committee's own intentions.
Of course, policy commitments can influence future expectations only to the extent that they are credible.
Various devices might be employed to enhance credibility; for example, the central bank can make securities purchases or issue financial options that make it quite costly, in financial terms, to renege on its commitments (Clouse et al., 2003).
An objection to this strategy is that it is not entirely clear why a central bank, which has the power to print money, should be overly concerned about its financial gains and losses.
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) point out that a government can more credibly promise to carry out policies that raise prices when (1) the government debt is large and not indexed to inflation and (2) the central bank values the reduction in fiscal burden that reflationary policies will bring (for example, because it may reduce the future level of distortionary taxation).
Ultimately, however, the central bank's best strategy for building credibility is to ensure that its deeds match its words, thereby building trust in its pronouncements.
The requirement that deeds match words has the consequence that the shaping of market expectations is not an independent instrument of policy in the long run.
II.
Altering the Composition of the Central Bank's Balance Sheet Central banks typically hold a variety of assets, and the composition of assets on the central bank's balance sheet offers another potential lever for monetary policy.
For example, the Federal Reserve participates in all segments of the Treasury market, with most of its current asset holdings of about $670 billion distributed among Treasury securities with maturities ranging from four weeks to thirty years.
Over the past fifty years, the average maturity of the Federal Reserve System's holdings of Treasury debt has varied considerably within a range from one to four years.
As an important participant in the Treasury market, the Federal Reserve might be able to influence term premiums, and thus overall yields, by shifting the composition of its holdings, say from shorter- to longer-dated securities.
In simple terms, if the liquidity or risk characteristics of securities differ, so that investors do not treat all securities as perfect substitutes, then changes in relative demands by a large purchaser have the potential to alter relative security prices.
(The same logic might lead the central bank to consider purchasing assets other than Treasury securities, such as corporate bonds or stocks or foreign government bonds.
The Federal Reserve is currently authorized to purchase some foreign government bonds but not most private-sector assets, such as corporate bonds or stocks.)
Perhaps the most extreme example of a policy keyed to the composition of the central bank's balance sheet is an announced ceiling on some longer-term yield below the prevailing rate.
This policy entails (in principle) an unlimited commitment to purchase the targeted security at the announced price.
(To keep the overall size of its balance sheet unchanged, the central bank would have to sell other securities in an amount equal to the purchases of the targeted security.)
Obviously, such a policy would signal strong dissatisfaction on the part of the policymaking committee with current market expectations of future policy rates.
Whether policies based on manipulating the composition of the central bank balance sheet can be effective is a contentious issue.
The limited empirical evidence generally suggests that the degree of imperfect substitutability within broad asset classes, such as Treasury securities, is not great, so that changes in relative supplies within the range of U.S. experience are unlikely to have a major impact on risk premiums or term premiums (Reinhart and Sack, 2001).
If this view is correct, then attempts to enforce a floor on the prices of long-dated Treasury securities (for example) could be effective only if the target prices were broadly consistent with investor expectations of future values of the policy rate.
If investors doubted that rates would be kept low, the central bank would end up owning all or most of those securities.
Moreover, even if large purchases of, say, a long-dated Treasury security were able to affect the yield on that security, the policy may not have significant economic effects if the targeted security became "disconnected" from the rest of the term structure and from private rates, such as mortgage rates.
Yet another complication affecting this type of policy is that the central bank's actions would have to be coordinated with the central government's finance department to ensure that changes in debt-management policies do not offset the attempts of the central bank to affect the relative supplies of securities.
According to James Tobin, the Federal Reserve's failure to coordinate adequately with the Treasury was the undoing of "Operation Twist" in 1963 (Tobin, 1973, pp.
32-33).
Despite these objections, we should not fail to note that policies based on changing the composition of the central bank's balance sheet have been tried in the United States.
From 1942 to 1951, the Federal Reserve enforced rate ceilings at two and sometimes three points on the Treasury yield curve.
This objective was accomplished with only moderate increases in the Federal Reserve's overall holdings of Treasury securities, relative to net debt outstanding; moreover, there is little evidence that the targeted yields became "disconnected" from other public or private yields.
The episode is an intriguing one, but unfortunately the implications for current policy are not entirely straightforward.
We know that, by 1946, the Federal Reserve System owned almost nine-tenths of the (relatively small) stock of Treasury bills, suggesting that at the short end, the ceiling on the bill rate was a binding constraint.
In contrast, the Federal Reserve's relative holdings of longer-dated Treasury notes and bonds fell over the period, although the rate ceilings at these longer maturities were not breached until inflation pressures led to the Fed-Treasury Accord and the abandonment of the pegging policy in 1951.
The conventional interpretation is that long-run policy expectations must have been consistent with the ceilings at the more distant points on the yield curve.
Less clear is the extent to which the pegging policy itself influenced those policy expectations.
Probably the safest conclusion about policies based on changing the composition of the central bank's balance sheet is that they should be used only to supplement other policies, such as an attempt (for example, through a policy commitment) to influence expectations of future short rates.
This combined approach allows the central bank to enjoy whatever benefits arise from changing the relative supplies of outstanding securities without risking the problems that may arise if the yields desired by the central bank are inconsistent with market expectations.
III.
Expanding the Size of the Central Bank's Balance Sheet Besides changing the composition of its balance sheet, the central bank can also alter policy by changing the size of its balance sheet; that is, by buying or selling securities to affect the overall supply of reserves and the money stock.
Of course, this strategy represents the conventional means of conducting monetary policy, as described in many textbooks.
These days, most central banks choose to calibrate the degree of policy ease or tightness by targeting the price of reserves--in the case of the Federal Reserve, the overnight federal funds rate.
However, nothing prevents a central bank from switching its focus from the price of reserves to the quantity or growth of reserves.
When stated in terms of quantities, it becomes apparent that even if the price of reserves (the federal funds rate) becomes pinned at zero, the central bank can still expand the quantity of reserves.
That is, reserves can be increased beyond the level required to hold the overnight rate at zero--a policy sometimes referred to as "quantitative easing."
Some evidence exists that quantitative easing can stimulate the economy even when interest rates are near zero; see, for example, Christina Romer's (1992) discussion of the effects of increases in the money supply during the Great Depression in the United States.
Quantitative easing may affect the economy through several possible channels.
One potential channel is based on the premise that money is an imperfect substitute for other financial assets (in contrast to the view discussed in the previous section that emphasizes the imperfect substitutability of various nonmoney assets).
If this premise holds, then large increases in the money supply will lead investors to seek to rebalance their portfolios, raising prices and reducing yields on alternative, non-money assets.
Lower yields on long-term assets will in turn stimulate economic activity.
The possibility that monetary policy works through portfolio substitution effects, even in normal times, has a long intellectual history, having been espoused by both Keynesians (Tobin, 1969) and monetarists (Brunner and Meltzer, 1973).
Recently, Javier Andres, J. David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2003) have shown how these effects might work in a general equilibrium model with optimizing agents.
The practical importance of these effects remains an open question, however.
Quantitative easing may also work by altering expectations of the future path of policy rates.
For example, suppose that the central bank commits itself to keeping reserves at a high level, well above that needed to ensure a zero short-term interest rate, until certain economic conditions obtain.
Theoretically, this action is equivalent to a commitment to keep interest rates at zero until the economic conditions are met, a type of policy we have already discussed.
However, the act of setting and meeting a high reserves target is more visible, and hence may be more credible, than a purely verbal promise about future short-term interest rates.
Moreover, this means of committing to a zero interest rate will also achieve any benefits of quantitative easing that may be felt through non-expectational channels.
Lastly, quantitative easing that is sufficiently aggressive and that is perceived to be long-lived may have expansionary fiscal effects.
So long as market participants expect a positive short-term interest rate at some date in the future, the existence of government debt implies a current or future tax liability for the public.
In expanding its balance sheet by open-market purchases, the central bank replaces public holdings of interest-bearing government debt with non-interest-bearing currency or reserves.
If the open-market operation is not expected to be reversed too quickly, this exchange reduces the present and future interest costs of the government and the tax burden on the public.
(Effectively, this process replaces a direct tax, say on labor, with the inflation tax.)
Auerbach and Obstfeld (2003) have analyzed the fiscal and expectational effects of a permanent increase in the money supply along these lines.
Note that the expectational and fiscal channels of quantitative easing, though not the portfolio substitution channel, require the central bank to make a credible commitment to not reverse its open-market operations, at least until certain conditions are met.
Thus, this approach also poses communication challenges for monetary policy makers.
Japan once again provides the most recent case study.
In the past two years, current account balances held by commercial banks at the Bank of Japan have increased about five-fold, and the monetary base has risen to almost 30 percent of nominal GDP.
While deflation appears to have eased in Japan recently, it is difficult to know how much of the improvement is due to monetary policy, and, of the part due to monetary policy, how much is due to the zero-interest-rate policy and how much to quantitative easing.
The experience of the United States with quantitative policies is limited to the period 1979 to 1982, when the Federal Reserve targeted nonborrowed reserves.
Of course, nominal interest rates were not close to zero at that time.
The U.S. experience does suggest, however, that the demand for reserves may be sufficiently erratic that the effects of quantitative policies may be intrinsically hard to calibrate.
IV.
Sequencing and the "Costs" of Low Interest Rates The forms of monetary stimulus described above can be used once the overnight rate has already been driven to zero or as a way of driving the overnight rate to zero.
However, a central bank might choose to rely on these alternative policies while maintaining the overnight rate somewhat above zero.
For example, monetary policy makers might attempt to influence market expectations of future short rates as an alternative to changing the current setting of the overnight rate.
Another possibility is to try to affect term premiums, expectations of future rates, or both, by changing the composition of securities held by the central bank.
(Unlimited expansion of the total volume of securities held by the central bank is not compatible, of course, with a positive overnight rate.)
The appropriate sequencing of policy actions depends on the perceived costs associated with very low or zero overnight interest rates, as well as on operational considerations and estimates of the likely effects of alternative combinations of policies on the economy.
What costs are imposed on society by very low short-term interest rates?
Observers have pointed out that rates on financial instruments typically priced below the overnight rate, such as liquid deposits, shares in money market mutual funds, and collateralized borrowings in the "repo" market, would be squeezed toward zero as the policy rate fell, prompting investors to seek alternatives.
Short-term dislocations might result, for example, if funds flowed in large amounts from money market mutual funds into bank deposits.
In that case, some commercial paper issuers who have traditionally relied on money market mutual funds for financing would have to seek out new sources, while banks would need to find productive uses for the deposit inflows and perhaps face changes in regulatory capital requirements.
In addition, liquidity in some markets might be affected; for example, the incentive for reserve managers to trade federal funds diminishes as the overnight rate falls, probably thinning brokering in that market.
In thinking about the costs associated with a low overnight rate, one should bear in mind the message of Milton Friedman's classic essay on the optimal quantity of money (Friedman, 1969).
Friedman argued that an overnight interest rate of zero is optimal, because a zero opportunity cost of liquidity eliminates the socially wasteful use of resources to economize on money balances.
From this perspective, the costs of low short-term interest rates can be seen largely as adjustment costs, arising from the unwinding of schemes designed to make holding transactions balances less burdensome.
These costs are real but are also largely transitory and have limited sectoral impact.
Moreover, to the extent that the affected institutions have economic functions other than helping clients economize on money balances (for example, if some money market mutual funds have a comparative advantage in lending to commercial paper issuers), there is scope for repricing that will allow these services to continue to be offered.
Thus there seems to be little reason for central banks to avoid bringing the policy rate close to zero if the economic situation warranted.
A quite different argument for engaging in alternative monetary policies before lowering the overnight rate all the way to zero is that the public might interpret a zero instrument rate as evidence that the central bank has "run out of ammunition."
That is, low rates risk fostering the misimpression that monetary policy is ineffective.
As we have stressed, that would indeed be a misimpression, as the central bank has means of providing monetary stimulus other than the conventional measure of lowering the overnight nominal interest rate.

