For three years these reformers lie dormant, biding their time and fine-tuning their plans.
It is not yet time, they caution.
Let's wait until presidential politics are out of the way.
This conference seems to be a first shot in the 2005 reform round, much like the first robin song of spring.
I confess that in the past I have been a part of the reform campaign, though my efforts in 1997 were largely dictated by the advisory council I had chaired for the previous three years.
As everybody knows, the 1997 round came to naught, as did the 2001 round, the 1993 round, the 1989 round, and the 1985 round.
The odds are that the 2005 round will come to naught too, but hope springs eternal.
In 1997 I advocated a plan that I still think is sound, and one that I still like better than any alternative I have seen.
It contained some steps to tighten up the present system--most notably indexing the retirement age to overall life expectancy.
One could buttress these steps, and add modestly to system progressivity, by changing the maximum taxable wage amount or by adjusting benefit bend points or marginal replacement rates.
My plan also featured small-scale add-on individual accounts.
I thought small-scale individual accounts would be viewed as a nice, moderate solution to the problem of generating new national saving and new saving for retirement, but in fact they were universally condemned.
Basically, liberals seem to fear any new individual accounts, and conservatives don't like accounts that are too small.
Small individual accounts can also be criticized as a costly way to raise saving.
Were I playing this time around, I might compromise with political reality by foregoing the individual accounts.
Low national saving is still a very important issue, but dealing with it through general fiscal policy would be more efficient.
As for Social Security, perhaps we could just index the retirement age and take some other measures, of which there are many possibilities, to bring the system into actuarial balance.
But that approach may not be universally appealing either, and I will probably sit out the 2005 round.
Just like an aging player who turns to umpiring when he can no longer hit the fast ball, for this talk I am going to focus not on reform plans themselves but on the rules of the game.
When liberals or conservatives fashion their reform plans this year, they ought to play by certain rules, and I want to list and defend those rules.
Some of these rules are merely repeated from our 1997 advisory council report, and some I developed later in response to what I consider to be policymaking false advertising.
1.
Stick to standard assumptions Many assumptions go into Social Security forecasts and reform plan forecasts.
The trustees' report is the source of these assumptions, thirteen of which are important.
For both economic and demographic assumptions, the trustees and their staffs, covering four government agencies, work with two outside trustees, as well as the actuaries for Social Security and Medicare, to review past information and to project sensible assumptions.
From time-to-time technical panels have reviewed and assessed the trustees' assumptions.
The trustee process has generally worked very well.
It has been remarkably free of political influence, a considerable achievement in view of the stakes involved.
Advisory councils and outside analysts alike have used the trustees' assumptions, and most of the ensuing arguments have involved the policies themselves, not the assumptions.
These assumptions are sometimes controversial.
In recent years the trustees have arguably used overly pessimistic productivity assumptions, which would tend to worsen the actuarial balance of the Social Security trust fund (SSTF), and overly pessimistic mortality assumptions, which would tend to improve the SSTF actuarial balance.
In a deeper sense, it has not always been clear that the trustees' assumptions have come from a common theoretical framework.
The process would certainly benefit from more concentrated attention on how the macroeconomy should be modeled in the long run.
Questions that could be asked include whether the real wage assumptions are consistent with the real interest rate assumptions, whether the retirement assumptions are consistent with the mortality assumptions, and whether the population assumptions are consistent with the factor-augmenting productivity assumptions from a production function.
The process will also benefit from the input of other agencies, such as the Congressional Budget Office.
Two sets of analyses are better than one, and the trustees' assumptions should be improved and refined over time with the added debate.
At the same time, I would still argue that the trustees' assumptions, long the bedrock of Social Security forecasts, should continue to play a central role.
The base case of all plans should be analyzed with the intermediate assumptions of the trustees.
2.
Conduct proper stochastic simulations But base cases aren't everything.
Even when the forecast period is only one or two years, economic forecasters should show alternative simulations.
Social Security forecasters should certainly make alternative projections further into the future, an activity known as sensitivity analysis.
In the past, the trustees have carried out optimistic and pessimistic simulations by varying all thirteen important assumptions up or down.
Although better than nothing, this approach could give a misleading view of the stochastic uncertainty, because it is highly unlikely that all thirteen variables will go one way or the other.
Statisticians have long known how to deal with such issues--they just estimate the full variance-covariance matrix and vary the assumptions probabilistically.
Then they run a large number of Monte Carlo simulations and compute the sensitivity bands from that.
One cannot literally do that with Social Security assumptions because the forecasts are appropriately not all taken from past data with computable standard errors.
At the same time, the trustees do have lower and upper bounds on all assumptions, and the Monte Carlo methodology could be approximated.
Indeed, I am pleased to see that the trustees are already taking steps in this direction.
Most designers of reform plans have stuck to the base case in costing out their plans, but this convention should change as well.
Some plans look better or worse in particular scenarios, some are actually structured to reduce true stochastic uncertainty for the whole system, and some increase stochastic uncertainty.
It is important to know how various plans fare on this dimension.
Hence, along with the stochastic simulations of the present system, we should also require stochastic simulations of alternative plans, to learn how the system would fare under different scenarios.
3.
Conduct simulations for which the end point doesn't matter For years the trustees have assessed the long-run solvency of the program over a seventy-five-year period.
Seventy-five years seems like a long time, but for Social Security purposes it may not be long enough.
If trust fund inflows and outflows were roughly in balance beyond the seventy-five year horizon, a simulation of that length might be adequate for judging the long-run sustainability of the system.
But in fact, the years beyond the horizon are ones of large imbalance.
Hence, the seventy-five-year results give a misleadingly optimistic picture of SSTF finances.
Not only that, but because each passing year brings a new high-deficit year into the forecast period, the passage of time alone with no forecast error moves the system into a deeper actuarial deficit.
Were the Congress somehow to make changes that solved the seventy-five-year actuarial deficit, it would take only one year for the system to fall again into imbalance.
Such a situation could cause political discomfort, to say the least.
There are a number of ways to deal with this problem.
Before 1965 the trustees determined the long-run solvency of the system by making calculations in perpetuity.
This method was changed in 1965, partly because of the difficulty of making super long-run projections--say, projecting birth rates in 2450 (even though, because of discounting, those projections will not matter much).
In our advisory council report we hit on the idea of requiring any reform plan to stabilize the trust fund ratio (trust fund balance over annual expenditures) in the eighth decade out.
Such an approach avoids the end-point problem without using numbers beyond the seventy-five-year forecast horizon, though there could still be problems beyond the eighth decade.
One could also factor in some measure of automaticity--say, having tax rates or retirement ages gradually adjust to trends in spending or taxes.
We should still show flow results at various stages in the future, or cumulative results for subperiods, to prevent game-playing with time horizons.
But when results are cumulated into the present payroll tax change that would cover all future deficits, or other such magnitudes, let's make this calculation independent of end points.
And let's eliminate the situation in which the passage of time alone, with no forecast error, can change the actuarial balance of the SSTF.
4.
Integrate disability insurance Social Security is really two programs--a program for old-age and survivor assistance and a program for the disabled.
The disabled do not get analyzed much, but they are surprisingly important--at latest count numbering 18 percent of benefit recipients.
Benefits for the disabled are computed within the overall Social Security benefit formula.
Essentially, instead of averaging earnings over the high thirty-five-year career earnings, the averaging takes place for the time of the worker's disability back to age twenty-one.
This means that when reformers alter retirement ages, bend points, or marginal replacement rates, disabled workers are more or less dealt with in a proportionate manner, though some reformers have introduced special adjustments.
But disabled workers would not necessarily be dealt with in a proportionate manner by changes that convert normal payroll contributions to individual accounts, for the simple reason that the workers lose years in which to build up their accounts.
Compensatory adjustments can, of course, be made.
My only point is that adjustments ought to be made, or at least considered, to integrate disabled workers.
Plans that convert to individual accounts should not get a free ride because they ignore the disabled.
5.
Require reform plans to be internally financed So far most of my strictures could be taken right out of a statistics book, or from the report of the advisory council that I chaired.
I will now get a little more controversial.
One development that does make it difficult to choose among competing Social Security plans is that analysts have begun assuming fiscal transfers.
Such transfers can obviously improve the attractiveness of the present system or of reform plans.
For example, the present system could be preserved simply by transfers from the non-Social Security part of the federal budget.
Alternatively, workers could be allowed to divert their tax contributions into individual accounts and make up the difference with budgetary transfers.
Our advisory council did not recommend any such transfers, but many subsequent plans have.
Let's stop the practice and require all plans to be internally financed.
This seems the only fair way to compare plans.
I argued this point a few years ago when federal surpluses were projected and many of those who hold overall views about Social Security similar to mine were proposing fiscal transfers.
That time seems long ago.
Now that we have budget deficits as far as the eye can see and deficits that are large and getting larger, my case for fiscal abstinence should be much stronger.
This stricture would not abolish plans with transition costs--it would require only that any taxes or benefit cuts needed to fund the transition should be explicitly identified and assessed.
I would even extend the stricture to prevent loans of general revenues that might be paid back late in the transition period because we have no guarantee that these loans will in fact be paid back and because the possibilities for false advertising are too great.
Even if, by some miracle, the general government budget comes back into something approaching balance, I would still argue my case on the grounds of an even-handed comparison.
Perhaps the political imperatives won't be as strong then, but I still cannot find a strong reason why Social Security reform should not be internally financed.
6.
Do not incorporate an equity premium Many Social Security reform plans involve investing in equities, either publicly by the SSTF or privately through individual accounts.
There are sound reasons for such investments, and I make no criticism of the investments themselves.
But let's score the investments fairly.
It is true that for very long past periods stocks have outperformed bonds.
But stocks have not outperformed bonds for every decade within these long periods, and decades are relevant for analyses of individual accounts.
Over the future, every canon of modern-day finance, indeed every canon of traditional finance, suggests that prospective risk-adjusted rates of return should be the same on stocks and bonds.
So, plan reformers, invest in equities if you wish, but claim the same risk-adjusted rate of return for stocks and bonds.
Claiming higher returns on system or individual portfolios invested in equities is legitimate only if the simulation also factors in the greater investment risk.
Overall system finances should not benefit from portfolio shifts.
Assessment The first four of these scoring suggestions should not be controversial and should certainly be feasible with modern analytical techniques.
The last two may be more controversial, but they strike me as the only fair way to make comparisons across plans.

In my comments today I will talk about how corporate governance and risk management can work together to help directors fulfill their responsibilities.
Over the past two years, a considerable amount of time and energy have been expended in our country addressing corporate governance issues.
As we all know, the concept of corporate governance is not new to U.S. financial institutions.
Senior management and boards of directors of banks, both publicly traded and privately held, have a tradition of taking their responsibilities for ensuring effective governance seriously.
In my comments today, I want to address the state of corporate governance at community banks and describe what we are observing through the examination process.
I'll also touch on some of the developing best practices in corporate governance, internal control, and operational-risk management.
Many of these best practices seem to be resulting from community bankers like you, who are modifying corporate governance and risk management principles to make them relevant to your individual business and corporate structure.
At the Federal Reserve, we tend to favor best-practice approaches to corporate governance at community banks rather than a one-size-fits-all approach.
The Regulators' Perspective Let me begin by describing how regulators view the quality of corporate governance at community banks.
A review of results of recent Federal Reserve examinations that used the current CAMELS type of assessment indicates that most community banks have effective corporate governance.
Eighty-four percent of all community banks reviewed were rated highly with respect to risk-management practices, including corporate governance.
This is not to say that we don't see the need for improvement in certain areas.
Examination findings routinely cite ways in which risk management and corporate governance could be improved.
However, it is apparent that the senior management, boards, and audit committees in these highly rated organizations are setting annual agendas that focus attention on the high-risk and emerging-risk areas within their banks while continuing to provide appropriate oversight to the low-risk areas.
Internal auditors, or equivalent functions at these banks, are testing to determine whether the risk- management program is effective and are communicating the results to the board and the audit committee.So, the examination results appear to indicate that the majority of banks are getting the message on the basics of sound governance.
However, we also performed a review of the corporate governance at the subset of banks with weak or unsatisfactory ratings.
Not surprisingly, this review identified the major challenges facing these banks to be poor asset quality and corporate governance issues.
Eighty-nine percent of the lower-rated community banks experienced serious asset-quality problems.
Sixty percent of the community banks in this group experienced significant deficiencies in corporate governance.
The corporate governance deficiencies could broadly be described as internal control weaknesses, weak or inadequate internal audit coverage, significant violations of law, accounting system weaknesses, and information technology issues.
As you know, once an organization gets lax in its approach to corporate governance, problems tend to follow.
Many of you can recall the time and attention management devoted to section 112 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Improvement Act, which first required bank management reports on internal controls and auditor attestations in the early 1990s.
Then the process became routine, delegated to lower levels of management and stale to the changes in the way the business was being run.
Unfortunately, for organizations with weak governance, trying to change the culture again is taking an exceptional amount of senior management and directors' time--time taken away from building the business.
The challenge, therefore, is to ensure that the corporate governance at community banks keeps pace with the changing risks that you will face in the coming years.
According to a global survey of financial institutions conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers, one of the reasons financial institutions are not making the grade is that they equate effective governance with meeting the demands of regulators and legislators, without recognizing that sound governance is also good for business.1 That is, they tend to look at this as another compliance exercise.
The study goes on to state that the compliance mentality is limiting these institutions' ability to achieve strategic advantages through governance.
I agree that any institution who views corporate governance as merely a compliance exercise is missing the mark.
We all are aware of companies in various industries who have successfully presented their strategic vision to investors, but who later stumble because the execution of that strategy did not meet expectations.
Although shortfalls can occur for many reasons, one of the more common shortcomings is that the strategy was focused too much on market and financial results and too little on the infrastructure necessary to support and sustain the strategy.
Over the years, corporate managers have demonstrated that focusing on better process management can enhance financial returns and customer satisfaction.
They have learned that correcting errors, having downtime in critical systems, and failing to provide the timely training that would enable staff to handle their changing tasks, all create higher costs and lost revenue opportunities.
I challenge you to consider the corporate governance structure appropriate to your bank's unique business strategy and scale as an important investment, and to consider returns on that investment in terms of the avoidance of the costs of poor internal controls.
Corporate strategies often focus on the most likely future scenario and the benefits of a strategic initiative.
A sound governance, risk-management, and internal control environment starts by being part of the strategic planning exercise.
That is, while the strategy is being considered, managers and board members should be asking: What are the major risks of this plan?
How much risk exposure are we willing to accept?
What mitigating controls need to be in place to effectively limit these risks?
How will we know if these controls are working effectively?
In other words, by considering risks as part of the planning process, controls can be built into the design, the costs of errors and reworking in the initial rollout can be reduced, and the ongoing initiative can be more successful because monitoring can reveal when activities and results are missing their intended goals, and corrective actions can be initiated more promptly.
Operational Risk The Federal Reserve System is conducting selected reviews for operational risk at community banks.
By operational risk, I mean "the risk of direct or indirect loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people and systems or from external events," which is the definition used by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision.
At the Federal Reserve, we are placing an increasing focus on operational risk.
This is due in part to the significant improvements in interest-rate and credit-risk management that we have seen in the last two decades.
Thus, weaknesses in governance and internal controls and operational risks become more apparent.
For example, at one of our Reserve Banks we are conducting a pilot program specifically geared toward the operational-risk activities of smaller community banks, those with less than $500 million in assets.
One of the objectives of the program is to identify and test the key internal controls used by banks to mitigate operational-risk exposures.
The reviews focus on specific business processes with high operational risk--for example, the wire transfer and loan administration areas.
The bankers involved have responded very favorably to the program and indicated they have received measurable benefits.
Moreover, the program has identified some common operational control weaknesses to which we believe community banks should pay particular attention.
We expect to summarize these findings and provide further updates and guidance to the industry as we move forward.
The findings are not revolutionary insights but are confirmation of the importance of controls long in use by well-run organizations.
We hope these studies serve as reminders that can help bank managers continuously improve internal controls as part of the normal business process.
Risk Management and Introduction of New Activities An enterprise-wide risk-management program should be dynamic, constantly assessing changing risks when new business lines or activities are added or existing activities are altered.
Continuing reassessment of risks and controls, and communication with the business lines, are necessary to avoid a program that is operating on autopilot and does not proactively respond to change in the organization.
Many of the organizations that have seen their reputations tarnished in the past few years have simply neglected to consider emerging risks when adding new products and lines of business.
It is important to make sure that mitigating controls are in place before the product or activity begins, including adequate reports to the board, the audit committee, and senior management about new or changed processes, procedures, and controls.
The robustness and effectiveness of these controls must be evaluated independently, soon after the control structure is established, so that any shortcomings can be identified promptly and corrected.
Risk assessments initiated early in the planning process can give the bank time to implement mitigating controls and conduct a validation of the quality of those controls before launching the product.
Strong internal controls and governance require that these assessments be done by an independent group.
One of the weaknesses we have seen is that management delegates both the development and the assessment of the internal control structure to the same managers.
Instead, product-line management should have the responsibility for identifying risks and ensuring that the mitigating controls are effective, and the assessments should be done by a separate group of officers, auditors, or consultants independent of that line organization.
New products include products or services being offered to, or activities being conducted for the first time in, a new market or to a new category of customers or counterparties.
For example, a product that has traditionally been marketed to middle-income customers but that is now being rolled out to low- or moderate-income customers generally should be reviewed as a new product.
In addition, significant modifications to products, services, and activities--or to their pricing--warrant review as a new product.
Even small changes in the terms of products or the scope of services or activities can greatly alter their risk profiles and justify review as a new product.
When in doubt about whether a product, service, or activity warrants review as a new product, financial firms should err on the side of conservatism and route the proposal through the new-product approval process.
Cutting short a new-product review because of a rush to deliver a new product to market, or because of performance pressures, increases the potential for serious risk exposures and losses.
Let me describe the evolution of two traditional products that came to regulators' attention because the changing risk exposures in the products did not trigger appropriate changes in the internal control and risk-management infrastructure.
The first is credit cards, which have long been a profitable service offered by many financial institutions.
In the last several years, however, credit cards have been marketed to higher-credit-risk customers who traditionally would not have qualified for this product.
Despite the differences in risk profiles and revenue streams, targeted regulatory reviews of subprime credit card lending determined that internal controls and risk-management information had not been adapted to monitor these new products at some institutions.
Because so much of the revenue from these products is in the form of up-front, monthly, and late fees, rapid growth in the number of accounts leads to billing of fees ahead of charge-offs that occur later in the customer relationship.
Some banks were recording fee income as revenue when it was billed, and they had no information system to determine what share of those fees would eventually be collected.
As the number of accounts was growing, the write-off of uncollectible fees was not transparent in the aggregate fee income that was being recorded.
Once organizations tracked write-offs of uncollectible fees and tied them with credit scores of customers and aging of accounts, a portion of fees billed was reserved against losses.
Further, the rapid growth of credit card balances outstanding also masked the deteriorating credit quality of some portfolios.
When these organizations began to track charge-offs by age of account, six-month charge-off rates of subprime portfolios were found to exceed those of prime credit cards severalfold.
When management and boards looked at this new information, they saw a very different picture of the profitability of this product.
Some banks realized that as soon as growth of accounts slowed, the front-ending of income would be overcome by the back-ending of charge-offs.
They realized that the product as structured was in fact reducing shareholder value, and they took appropriate actions.
The second product evolution I want to examine is bounced-check protection.
Bankers have always honored the occasional check written by a good customer that was presented with insufficient funds.
But in the last couple of years, vendors have been marketing programs to grow fee income by promoting the availability of this balance-protection service.
Consumers do benefit when banks cover checks, since they do not incur returned- check charges from the merchant to whom they wrote the check, not to mention the embarrassment of bouncing a check.
But again, some bankers did not stop to consider how this new service was changing the risk profile of the service and effectively assess the risk and reward.
Here is where an enterprise-wide risk management approach to product introduction can help.
When a bank covers more checks for a greater variety of customers, it in effect changes the risk that those customers may never bring their accounts current.
If the fees for overdrafts are booked as income when billed to the account, it may be some time before the overdraft becomes large enough to call attention to the need for a charge-off.
If credit-risk officers were involved in the review of this new product, they might be more likely to realize that an information system should be in place to track the frequent users of this service and write a policy that called for timely recognition of charge-offs.
In fact, such a procedure could identify customers in temporary financial duress who might be candidates for loan products, in which case the bank could retain good long-term customers and appropriately structure the loan to reflect the risk, and the customers could obtain the needed credit at an all-in cost below what they would incur by using their checking accounts inappropriately.
The Federal Reserve, along with the other regulators, published for comment some guidance on this product, and I do not want to prejudge the results of that review.
So, in the meantime, I turn your attention to guidelines prepared by the American Bankers Association, which provide some useful information.
Conclusion In conclusion, community banks are further improving their traditional focus on strong corporate governance.
Those banks leading the way recognize that the culture of governance, risk management, and internal controls cannot readily be switched on and off.

