The question asked of this panel is, "What have we learned since October 1979?"
The evidence suggests that we have learned quite a bit.
Most notably, monetary policy-makers, political leaders, and the public have been persuaded by two decades of experience that low and stable inflation has very substantial economic benefits.
This consensus marks a considerable change from the views held by many economists at the time that Paul Volcker became Fed Chairman.
In 1979, most economists would have agreed that, in principle, low inflation promotes economic growth and efficiency in the long run.
However, many also believed that, in the range of inflation rates typically experienced by industrial countries, the benefits of low inflation are probably small--particularly when set against the short-run costs of a major disinflation, as the United States faced at that time.
Indeed, some economists would have held that low-inflation policies would likely prove counterproductive even in the long run, if an increased focus on inflation inhibited monetary policy-makers from responding adequately to fluctuations in economic activity and employment.
As it turned out, the low-inflation era of the past two decades has seen not only significant improvements in economic growth and productivity but also a marked reduction in economic volatility, both in the United States and abroad, a phenomenon that has been dubbed "the Great Moderation."
Recessions have become less frequent and milder, and quarter-to-quarter volatility in output and employment has declined significantly as well.
The sources of the Great Moderation remain somewhat controversial, but as I have argued elsewhere, there is evidence for the view that improved control of inflation has contributed in important measure to this welcome change in the economy (Bernanke, 2004).
Paul Volcker and his colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee deserve enormous credit both for recognizing the crucial importance of achieving low and stable inflation and for the courage and perseverance with which they tackled America's critical inflation problem.
I could say much more about Volcker's achievement and its lasting benefits, but I am sure that many other speakers will cover that ground.
Instead, in my remaining time, I will focus on some lessons that economists have drawn from the Volcker regime regarding the importance of credibility in central banking and how that credibility can be obtained.
As usual, the views I will express are my own and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.
Volcker could not have accomplished what he did, of course, had he not been appointed to the chairmanship by President Jimmy Carter.
In retrospect, however, Carter's appointment decision seems at least a bit incongruous.
Why would the President appoint as head of the central bank an individual whose economic views and policy goals (not to mention personal style) seemed, at least on the surface, quite different from his own?
However, not long into Volcker's term, a staff economist at the Board of Governors produced a paper that explained why Carter's decision may in fact have been quite sensible from the President's, and indeed the society's, point of view.
Although the question seems a narrow one, the insights of the paper had far broader application; indeed, this research has substantially advanced our understanding of the links among central bank credibility, central bank structure, and the effectiveness of monetary policy.
Insiders will have already guessed that the Board economist to whom I refer is Kenneth Rogoff, currently a professor of economics at Harvard, and that the paper in question is Ken's 1985 article, "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target" (Rogoff, 1985).1 The insights of the Rogoff paper are well worth recalling today.
Rather than considering the paper in isolation, however, I will place it in the context of two other classic papers on credibility and central bank design, an earlier work by Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott and a later piece by Carl Walsh.
As I proceed, I will note what I see to be the important lessons and the practical implications of this line of research.2 Central bankers have long recognized at some level that the credibility of their pronouncements matters.
I think it is fair to say, however, that in the late 1960s and 1970s, as the U.S. inflation crisis was building, economists and policymakers did not fully understand or appreciate the determinants of credibility and its link to policy outcomes.
In 1977, however, Finn Kydland and Edward Prescott published a classic paper, entitled "Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans" (Kydland and Prescott, 1977), that provided the first modern analysis of these issues.3 Specifically, Kydland and Prescott demonstrated why, in many situations, economic outcomes will be better if policymakers are able to make credible commitments, or promises, about certain aspects of the policies they will follow in the future.
"Credible" in this context means that the public believes that the policymakers will keep their promises, even if they face incentives to renege.
In particular, as one of Kydland and Prescott's examples illustrates, monetary policy-makers will generally find it advantageous to commit publicly to following policies that will produce low inflation.
If the policymakers' statements are believed (that is, if they are credible), then the public will expect inflation to be low, and demands for wage and price increases should accordingly be moderate.
In a virtuous circle, this cooperative behavior by the public makes the central bank's commitment to low inflation easier to fulfill.
In contrast, if the public is skeptical of the central bank's commitment to low inflation (for example, if it believes that the central bank may give in to the temptation to overstimulate the economy for the sake of short-term employment gains), then the public's inflation expectations will be higher than they otherwise would be.
Expectations of high inflation lead to more-aggressive wage and price demands, which make achieving and maintaining low inflation more difficult and costly (in terms of lost output and employment) for the central bank.
Providing a clear explanation of why credibility is important for effective policymaking, as Kydland and Prescott did, was an important step.
However, these authors largely left open the critical issue of how a central bank is supposed to obtain credibility in the first place.
Here is where Rogoff's seminal article took up the thread.4 Motivated by the example of Carter and Volcker, Rogoff's paper showed analytically why even a president who is not particularly averse to inflation, or at least no more so than the average member of the general public, might find it in his interest to appoint a well-known "inflation hawk" to head the central bank.
The benefit of appointing a hawkish central banker is the increased inflation-fighting credibility that such an appointment brings.
The public is certainly more likely to believe an inflation hawk when he promises to contain inflation because they understand that, as someone who is intrinsically averse to inflation, he is unlikely to renege on his commitment.
As increased credibility allows the central bank to achieve low inflation at a smaller cost than a non-credible central bank can, the president may well find, somewhat paradoxically, that he prefers the economic outcomes achieved under the hawkish central banker to those that could have been obtained under a central banker with views closer to his own and those of the public.
Appointing an inflation hawk to head the central bank may not be enough to ensure credibility for monetary policy, however.
As Rogoff noted in his article, for this strategy to confer significant credibility benefits, the central bank must be perceived by the public as being sufficiently independent from the rest of the government to be immune to short-term political pressures.
Thus Rogoff's proposed strategy was really two-pronged: The appointment of inflation-averse central bankers must be combined with measures to ensure central bank independence.
These ideas, supported by a great deal of empirical work, have proven highly influential.5 Indeed, the credibility benefits of central bank autonomy have been widely recognized in the past twenty years, not only in the academic literature but, far more consequentially, in the real-world design of central banking institutions.

In my prepared remarks, I would like to focus on two issues with respect to safeguarding good monetary policy practice.
First, I will discuss what constitutes good monetary policy practice and review the Federal Reserve's record in satisfying its mandates in recent decades.
Then, I will speculate on how good policy outcomes come about.
In particular, I will discuss the role of policy transparency, central bank leadership, and alternative monetary policy regimes in preserving effective monetary policy.
Of course, the usual caveat to my remarks applies: I will express my own views, and you should not interpret them as the position of the Federal Open Market Committee or of the Board of Governors.
Assessing the Federal Reserve's Performance after 1979 When assessing what constitutes good monetary policy practice, I prefer to focus not on theory but on the reality of the Federal Reserve's objectives.
In contrast to many other central banks, the Federal Reserve has been assigned a "dual mandate"--to pursue policies that both maintain price stability and achieve maximum sustainable economic growth and employment.
Good policy practice can be judged by the outcomes achieved.
Therefore, I would like to briefly outline the Federal Reserve's performance with respect to the level and the variability of inflation and growth.
To be sure, the strong economic performance over the past two decades has several possible explanations, but the practice of monetary policy has likely contributed by helping to preserve macroeconomic stability.
With respect to price stability, inflation in the United States over the past decade or so has clearly been lower and more stable than it was earlier in our history.
In fact, annual inflation in the price index of personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy--core PCE--averaged just over 2 percent from 1990 through the end of last year and consistently remained within a range--roughly 1 to 4 percent--that is relatively narrow compared with historical experience.
This period contrasts sharply to the fourteen-year period from 1965 through the end of 1979, when annual core-PCE inflation averaged just over 5 percent and fluctuated between 3 and 10 percent.
The recent experience of the United States with inflation has been similar in some respects and dissimilar in others to that of other countries.
For example, based on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's measures of overall consumer price inflation, prices rose at an annual average rate of about 3 percent in the United States from 1990 through 2003, compared with about 3 percent in the euro area and in the United Kingdom and roughly 1 percent in Japan.1 But, more important, the volatility of inflation was lower in the United States than in these other economies.
An equally important indicator of the success of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy is private expectations for future inflation.
Measures of inflation expectations obtained from financial asset prices clearly indicate that market participants expect that the Federal Reserve will maintain low and stable inflation.
For example, although the difference between the yields on nominal inflation-indexed and Treasury securities is an imperfect measure that includes complicating factors such as inflation risk and liquidity premiums, the five-year break-even inflation rate five years ahead has averaged about 2-1/2 percent over the past five years and has fluctuated in a narrow range of about 1-1/2 to 3-1/2 percent.
Survey measures confirm that inflation expectations over this period have been subdued and well anchored.
The University of Michigan's survey of ten-year inflation expectations has averaged less than 3 percent and has stayed within a very narrow range over the past five years.
Assessing the outcomes with respect to the Federal Reserve's goal of maximum sustainable output growth is inherently more difficult.
Estimates of the relevant measures, such as the nonaccelerating-inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU), which in recent years has been decreasing according to some estimates, have very wide confidence intervals.
But we can point to some evidence suggesting that the United States has enjoyed, besides subdued and stable inflation, some favorable developments with respect to output and employment.
Certainly, we can document substantial gains in productivity in recent decades in the United States.
According to the OECD, business sector labor productivity growth in the United States averaged about 2 percent from 1990 through the end of 2003, compared with about 1-1/2 percent in the euro area and in Japan over the same period.
And since the mid-1990s, this gap has widened, with annual productivity growth averaging about 2-1/2 percent since 1995 in the United States, compared with about 1-1/2 percent in Japan and just less than 1 percent in the euro area over the same period.2 Another important measure of the success of monetary policy is how well the FOMC has responded to threats to our nation's financial stability.
This claim is surely hard to quantify.
But everyone would agree that, compared especially with the deleterious effects of the Federal Reserve's policy response during the Great Depression, the Fed has responded effectively to more-recent crises so as to help minimize the impact of such shocks on the greater economy.
These episodes include the stock market crash of October 1987, the Asian financial crisis, and the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management in the late 1990s.
Thanks in no small part to the flexibility of our policy framework, which I will discuss in greater detail in a few moments, the Federal Reserve appropriately discharged its responsibility as lender of last resort by providing ample liquidity and ensuring confidence during these and other troubling episodes, including the aftermath of the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.
There is greater disagreement about how well the Federal Reserve responded to the bursting in recent years of the so-called bubble in technology stocks.
This topic is broad, but I would like to note that, as many of my colleagues and I have previously argued, prospectively addressing perceived asset-price bubbles is a matter of such great uncertainty that, even with the benefit of hindsight, it is not clear that policy decisions in the late 1990s, for example, should have been any different.
In any case, the recession that followed the sharp decline in stock prices was shallow by historical standards.
How Can We Safeguard Good Policy Outcomes?
I would now like to turn to issues related to preserving, as best we can, a continuation of good policy practice in the future.
Central Bank Transparency Consider first the important role of central bank transparency.
Transparency of central bank decisionmaking is desirable, not only for economic reasons, but also because it is supportive of central bank independence within a democratic society.
Because of the lagged effects of monetary policy on output and prices, the time horizon of central bankers is necessarily more distant than that of other policymakers.
Thus, the central bank needs substantial insulation from political pressures to execute policy: An independent monetary authority is less tempted to make policy for the short term, such as boosting output or refinancing national budgets, at the expense of long-run objectives.
Of course, the goals of monetary policy should be determined within the democratic process, but the central bank should have discretion to achieve those ends.
In short, an appropriate arrangement within democratic societies is for central banks to have independence with respect to the instruments, but not the goals of monetary policy, and transparency is an appropriate condition for that independence.
Besides its inherent virtues in a democratic society, transparency can enhance monetary policy's economic effectiveness by more closely aligning financial market forces with central bankers' intentions.
Like other central banks, the Federal Reserve controls only a very short-term interest rate, the overnight federal funds rate.
However, theory and empirical evidence suggest that longer-term interest rates and conditions in other financial markets, which reflect expectations for short-term rates, matter most for monetary policy transmission to the economy.
If the monetary authority is transparent about the rationale and the stance of policy as well as its perception of the economic outlook, then investors can improve their expectations of future short rates.3 The path that monetary policy will follow in the future is uncertain even to policymakers because that trajectory will depend on incoming news about the economy and the implications of that news for the economic outlook.
But announcing policy decisions in a timely manner and explaining those decisions fully allows market participants to better anticipate the response of policy to unexpected developments and to speed needed financial adjustments.
Central Bank Leadership Next, I consider the role of the individuals entrusted with the responsibility for making policy decisions.
Although monetary policy frameworks have a potentially great influence on macroeconomic outcomes, we should not forget that the individuals who serve in central banks themselves have a crucial role in preserving policy outcomes.
Even with a monetary policy regime that follows best practices and shapes the decisionmaking process, ultimately individuals' beliefs and perceptions still matter for the actual policy taken.
An interesting recent study of the history of the Federal Reserve by Christina Romer and David Romer finds a very strong link between the skill and knowledge of the FOMC, particularly the Chairman, and macroeconomic outcomes.4 For example, with little reference to transformations in the disclosure policy and the independence of the Federal Reserve over the years, they ascribe the policy successes of two periods--the 1950s and the 1980s and 1990s--to a conviction of Federal Reserve Chairmen regarding the high costs of inflation and their tempered views about the sustainable levels of output and employment.
In contrast, they attribute the deflationary and counterproductive policies of the 1930s to the erroneous belief that monetary policy can do little to stimulate output and that the economy can actually overheat at low levels of capacity utilization.
But there is one aspect of the process that Romer and Romer do not emphasize enough--the ability of central bankers in general, and indeed members of the FOMC in particular, to withstand political pressures.
In addition, central bankers should have a thorough and practical, rather than a purely academic, understanding of the economy and, given the Federal Reserve's objective to preserve financial stability, of financial markets and institutions.
The committee's institutional memory may also matter in this context.
Today, the FOMC is well versed in the monetary history of the 1970s and 1980s, for example, and recognizes the great efforts that previous members of the FOMC undertook to achieve price stability.
I trust that future generations of policymakers will continue to share that understanding and thus help to preserve good policy outcomes.
Will Inflation Targets Preserve Good Policy Practice?
Finally, I would like to touch on a topic that is perhaps more controversial in the context of safeguarding good policy practice.
Several academic and professional economists, including distinguished colleagues of mine at this conference, have eloquently advocated the adoption of explicit numerical goals for central bank objectives, most notably inflation targets.
The adoption of numerical targets, it is argued, facilitates central bank accountability and better anchors private expectations about inflation and monetary policy and thereby yields better macroeconomic outcomes.
Quantifying central bank objectives has some positive aspects and, certainly, vigorous advocates.
Nonetheless, I harbor significant reservations about this approach regarding both its practical implementation, in the specific context of the Federal Reserve System, and its demonstrated effectiveness based on inferences from the recent experience of regimes that have specific numerical targets, particularly with respect to inflation, around the world.
A basic, yet difficult, issue is the selection of a particular price index to guide policy, even in the case of a single goal such as inflation.
Experience tells us that economies and the composition of productive enterprises change over time, and therefore the appropriate index and inflation value for the monetary authority would also need to change to reflect technological and other advances.
In light of this inherent uncertainty associated with the construction of a price index, one might be concerned that choosing and rigidly adhering to an inappropriate index could have negative economic consequences that might outweigh prospective benefits.
Also, we must consider the ramifications of quantified goals in the context of our democracy.
That is, the quantification of objectives becomes even more problematic for central banks such as the Federal Reserve with multiple democratically based mandates, some of which are notably less disposed to quantification than others.
For example, considering our dual mandate from the Congress, how do we measure maximum sustainable employment?
Indeed, as I mentioned previously, estimates of the NAIRU and other possible related measures that address the full-employment objective such as the output gap have uncomfortably wide confidence intervals and are far more controversial than selecting a target for a specific price index.
Of course, the central bank could in principle quantify only the inflation objective.
However, I fear that quantifying one goal and not the other would present problems because the monetary authority might inadvertently place more emphasis on the quantified goal at the expense of the nonquantified objective.
Doing so would seem inappropriate.
The ease of quantification should not influence how the Federal Reserve pursues its dual mandate.
In addition, I worry about the potential loss of flexibility from the implementation of an inflation target, as explicit numerical goals might inhibit the central bank's focus on output variation or financial stability.
I would argue that, besides the episodes of financial turmoil in the late 1990s mentioned earlier, supply shocks, such as large increases in oil prices that simultaneously increase the price level and decrease aggregate output, can be problematic for inflation-targeting regimes.
Of course, some variants of the approach--so-called flexible inflation targeting for instance--can address the issues I just raised by stipulating wide target ranges, by maintaining escape clauses that allow inflation to diverge from the target, or by aiming at average inflation over the business cycle.
But the credibility gains from inflation targeting seem to me to be inversely related to its flexibility.

