The role of trade in the U.S. economy has moved well into the spotlight in recent years, and I am pleased to be here today to share my thoughts on this important topic with such distinguished and knowledgeable colleagues.
Over the course of this day, you will be hearing from leading analysts, policymakers, and commentators about recent developments in the U.S. economy, past and prospective trends in job creation, the role of sourcing (both out- and in-), and the implications of trade for the coming elections.
In my remarks this morning, I would like to put these issues into the broader context of the debate over free trade and its implications for the American economy.
Though my focus will be on free trade, we must remember that prospects for the average American depend on many other factors as well, including technological progress, the education required to exploit this progress, a dynamic market-oriented economy, a framework of limited but effective regulation, healthy and well-governed financial institutions, and a stable macroeconomic environment.
And free trade is not necessarily the most important item on this list.
Even so, it has been a focus of interest and aspiration for economists dating back to Adam Smith and David Ricardo.
As you know, finding overwhelming agreement on issues is difficult among economists, but free trade is an exception.1 The supporters of free trade have not been ignored.
In the past half-century, global trade has become freer and has expanded rapidly.
The ratio of trade (exports plus imports) to worldwide gross domestic product rose from only 16 percent in 1960 to 40 percent by 2001.
In 1960, the United States, Germany, and Japan had average tariff rates of around 7 percent; these rates were more than halved by 1993.
The number of members of the World Trade Organization (WTO), or its predecessor, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, rose from 18 in 1948 to 146 in 2003, and the number of regional trade agreements in the world ballooned from only 1 in 1958 to 161 in 2003.
Although most economists welcome these trends, the public at large has been much more ambivalent about international trade.
Attitudes toward free trade in principle remain generally positive, but a substantial--and, perhaps, growing--minority of Americans hold more negative views.
According to a poll completed around the beginning of this year, 41 percent of respondents viewed the process of increasing international trade through reduction of barriers as proceeding too quickly; this number was up from 30 percent in 1999.
And 43 percent of respondents believed that the government should try to slow or reverse the expansion of international trade, up from 39 percent in 1999.2 What accounts for the apparent deterioration in public support for free trade over the past five years?
The widening of the U.S. trade deficit may have exacerbated concerns about the country's international competitiveness.
More important, some have blamed overseas competition for the job losses associated with the economic slowdown earlier in this decade.
Without solid public support for free trade, achieving continued progress in reducing protectionist barriers, both at home and abroad, may become more difficult.
In the remainder of my remarks, I'd like to review the arguments for and against free trade, explore why it has been difficult to muster more widespread public support for this goal, and address some of the consequences of trade protection as it has been implemented in practice.
Arguments for Free TradeInternational trade contributes to prosperity and growth through several channels.
These channels are not especially subtle or esoteric, and I would argue that the public at large understands them reasonably well.
At the same time, however, quantifying the contributions of trade to national welfare is by no means straightforward.
First, and most obviously, trade increases the variety of goods available to consumers.
Trade provides some products that otherwise would be beyond the reach of most American households, such as roses for Valentine's Day, or peaches and nectarines during the winter.
More generally, international trade allows us to choose from a wider array of goods than would otherwise be available: Japanese and German cars in addition to American, Chilean apples as well as Washington state, French and Australian wine as well as Californian.
It is difficult to put a dollar figure on the value of this increased variety to the consumer, but estimates range as high as nearly 3 percent of GDP.3 A second benefit of international trade is its role in reducing the cost of goods and hence in raising our standard of living.
To anyone who has walked into a large discount store and surveyed the range of low-priced items produced in any number of distant economies, this benefit is abundantly clear.
However, actually measuring the extent to which trade holds down consumer costs is tricky.
Between 1990 and 2003, for example, the overall consumer price index rose 41 percent, whereas prices declined for many highly traded goods, including toys (whose prices fell 26 percent), televisions (53 percent), and clocks and lamps (15 percent); in just the past five years, the price of telephones, calculators, and other such items has fallen 42 percent.
Yet, we do not know how much of the decline in these prices can be attributed to trade, as most traded products are manufactures and are subject to greater productivity growth (and hence steeper declines in costs) than nontraded products such as services.
A more fruitful approach may be to compare the prices of goods that are protected from international competition with what they would be in the absence of such barriers.
A recent study by the U.S. International Trade Commission indicates that sectoral trade liberalization would lower the price of sugar for U.S. consumers by 8 percent, of apparel by 5 percent, and of footwear and leather products by 4 percent.4 Clearly, if international trade were curtailed for a much broader range of goods, the cost of living for American workers would be higher and the standard of living correspondingly lower.
A third key benefit of free trade is that it allows economies to specialize in the activities they do best.
This notion was at the core of the classical economists' defense of free trade.
By allowing England to specialize in cloth production and Portugal in wine, for example, international commerce leads to a higher income for both countries than if each tried to produce both goods for themselves.
By the same token, no American today would object to trade between Massachusetts and Montana, or between Alaska and Alabama--the various U.S. states obviously have their own comparative advantages in producing a variety of different products, and trade among them makes such specialization possible.
Extending the example of trade among states to trade among countries is not much of a stretch.
Can we measure the extent to which the specialization associated with free trade may boost incomes and welfare?
Such an estimate is obviously no simple thing to calculate.
Economists frequently use so-called computable general equilibrium models, often consisting of hundreds of equations, to address this issue.
A recent analysis of the effects of past trade liberalizations on the U.S. economy puts the gains to U.S. welfare at about 1/2 percent of GDP.5 A separate analysis of a hypothetical 33 percent reduction in trade barriers around the world suggests it would raise welfare by 1-1/2 percent of global GDP.6 In addition to promoting specialization, trade boosts productivity through a fourth channel of influence: opening the economy to heightened competition.
This effect could occur either as firms are spurred by foreign competitors to become more efficient, or as the least productive firms are forced to close, thus raising the average level of productivity for the economy as a whole.
Again, most Americans likely recognize the importance of competition in boosting performance--the ascendancy of Japanese automobiles, for example, has been cited as a factor that has spurred Detroit to greater innovation and better quality.
By heightening competitive forces and thus incentives for productivity and innovation, international trade has likely accelerated the process of "creative destruction" by which outdated and less productive activities are replaced by new technologies and more dynamic enterprises.
Academic research supports the view that import competition has led U.S. manufacturing firms to become more capital intensive;7 trade liberalization apparently has enhanced productivity in some import-competing firms in foreign countries as well.8 Producing for export markets may also yield dividends: Research suggests that exporters are more productive than non-exporters in the same industry and that they grow more rapidly as well.9 Finally, many studies suggest that countries that are more open to international trade have enjoyed higher rates of economic growth.10 Our sad experience after adoption of the Smoot-Hawley tariff of 1930, as well as the record of Latin America, India, and other regions that experimented with "import-substituting industrialization," point to the deterioration in economic performance that occurs when countries erect barriers to trade.11 Arguments against Free TradeIf the benefits conferred by international trade are reasonably straightforward, how can we explain the apparent ambivalence toward trade picked up by recent surveys?
Clearly, many people view the benefits of free trade as being outweighed by its perceived costs.
One concern about free trade may be that it has given rise to large trade and current account deficits, thereby adding to the nation's debt and putting future prosperity at risk.
Now at more than 5 percent of GDP, the current account deficit is in record territory, it is growing, and it cannot be sustained indefinitely.
We cannot foresee when the deficit will stop growing and return to more-sustainable levels, through what mechanisms this adjustment will occur, or whether this adjustment will be smooth or disruptive for financial markets and the economy more generally.
No matter how a correction of the external imbalance proceeds, however, it will involve a range of adjustments to investment, saving, and asset prices, both for the U.S. economy and for our trading partners.
Research suggests that past corrections of large external imbalances in industrial countries generally have occurred without crisis.12 Whether or not this will remain the case, I am confident that protectionism is not the appropriate response to our growing current account deficit.
The amount of current account adjustment that would be gained from a given tightening of import controls is questionable.
Yet, it is certain that such actions would impose costs on the economy that would persist long after concerns about the deficit dissipated.
A second concern about free trade that is frequently voiced, and probably a more important one to many people, is that trade destroys American jobs and creates unemployment.
The same survey I mentioned earlier, showing a deterioration in general attitudes toward trade, also indicated that 40 percent of respondents believed that trade barriers should be maintained because of the threat to U.S. jobs, up from 31 percent in 1999.13 It is worth distinguishing among several variants of the concern about trade and jobs.
The first variant holds that the rise in imports lowers employment and raises the unemployment rate by shifting jobs overseas.
This claim is strongly contradicted both by theory and by experience.
Make no mistake: Import competition clearly has cost some American workers their jobs and has caused them considerable hardship as a result.
However, economywide equilibrating forces, including monetary policy, ensure that over time such employment losses are offset by gains elsewhere in the economy, so that the nationwide unemployment rate averages around its equilibrium level.
In fact, the inflow of foreign capital that finances our trade deficit provides the funding for investment projects that employ U.S. workers just as surely as does any other productive activity in the economy.
Between 1960 and 2003, the trade balance moved from a slight surplus to a deficit of 4-1/2 percent of GDP, and nominal imports rose from about 4 percent of GDP to 14 percent--yet, the current unemployment rate of about 5-1/2 percent is little changed from its 1960 level, while nonfarm private employment has grown by more than 60 million jobs.14 It has also been suggested that import competition has caused a significant portion of the decline in employment since the recession of 2001.
Yet, the ratio of the nominal trade deficit to GDP widened less than 1 percentage point between 2000 and 2003.
Moreover, this deterioration came entirely from a decline in the ratio of exports to GDP, from 11.2 percent in 2000 to 9.5 percent in 2003; the ratio of imports to GDP actually declined about 1 percentage point over this period.
A second variant of the concern over trade and jobs is certainly valid: Import competition can be highly disruptive and cause considerable pain for those who lose their jobs.
One study of worker displacement indicates that only about two-thirds of displaced workers found another job within three years, and even when they were successful in finding full-time work, the earnings of these workers on average declined 8 percent.15 Another study found that job losers in industries facing heavy import competition were slightly less likely to be reemployed, and suffered greater earnings losses, than workers who lost their jobs in industries facing less import competition.16 We cannot and should not minimize the hardships of workers displaced by imports.
However, we must also keep in mind that their numbers are relatively small compared with either the total labor force or even the total number of jobs lost in the United States.
Estimates of the gross number of jobs lost to imports vary, but one representative estimate puts them at a bit more than 300,000 per year during the 1980s and 1990s.17 This number, while hardly negligible, is dwarfed by the roughly 15 million job losses estimated to occur each year in the United States.
As our dynamic market economy evolves, it generates substantial churning in labor markets as jobs are gained in some sectors and lost in others; jobs gained and lost because of trade are only a small part of that process.
It is understandable that concerns about job losses from import competition may extend far beyond their actual incidence in the labor market, given more general anxieties about employment security among American workers.
However, to echo a point that has been made before, the proper response to the disruptions associated with trade is not to reduce trade, but rather to ameliorate the pain associated with those disruptions through enhanced assistance and retraining for displaced workers.
A final concern about trade that I would like to discuss is that import competition, whether or not it affects the number of jobs, shifts the employment mix from high-quality jobs to low-quality jobs.
For example, critics have long held that international trade pushes workers out of manufacturing jobs and into less desirable service-sector jobs.
However, no conclusive evidence has shown that, over the long haul, the service jobs being created pay less or are otherwise less desirable than manufactured jobs being displaced.
Moreover, the declining share of manufacturing in U.S. employment most likely stems less from import competition than it does from the rapid pace of productivity growth in manufacturing; this growth outpaced the productivity growth of the overall economy by about 1-1/4 percentage points annually from 1973 to 1994 and by 1-1/2 percentage points from 1994 to 2000.
The higher rate of productivity growth in manufacturing has restrained both price increases and employment in the sector, thus leading the services area of the economy to expand its share of spending and jobs.
This phenomenon is hardly unique to the United States--the share of manufacturing has declined in most of our major foreign trading partners as well.
More recently, the outsourcing of service jobs to developing countries has come under the spotlight.
The increasing use of computer programming talent in India and other low-wage countries has, understandably, struck a chord of anxiety among American workers.
For years, the response of pro-trade advocates to the loss of low-wage jobs in manufacturing has been that they are being made up by the creation of higher-paid, higher-skilled jobs in the service sector.
The loss of highly paid programming jobs to lower-paid workers abroad now appears to suggest that there is no place where American workers can hold their own.
Yet, as in the case of import competition more generally, we must not exaggerate the importance of outsourcing to the nation's overall employment picture.
There are no conclusive data, but a prominent study puts the number of jobs displaced through services outsourcing over the next decade or so at fewer than 300,000 annually, or less than 2 percent of the 15 million in total gross job losses I noted earlier.18 Moreover, only a fraction of those jobs represent high-skilled, high-wage jobs; these numbers are quite difficult to pin down, but one study puts the number of software jobs lost to India since 2000 at fewer than 50,000 annually.19 Finally, we should remember that the United States gains jobs through what is often referred to as "insourcing," that is, performing service jobs for other countries.
In fact, the United States has consistently run a surplus in those categories of the balance-of-payments associated with trade in business services.
Turning from the sectoral job mix to the impact of import competition on wages, the evidence is particularly unclear.
Some studies have suggested that import competition from low-wage countries has depressed wages for low-skilled workers relative to those for higher-skilled workers in recent decades.
However, other studies have argued that the rise in skill premiums is attributable to technological developments that have raised relative demands for educated workers.
Focusing on the past few years, we see no consensus on how the mix of low- and high-wage jobs in the economy has evolved; estimates are extremely sensitive to the definition of job classes, the source of data, the time period, and method of calculation.
In any event, it is doubtful that changes in the pattern of wages in the U.S. economy can be explained by any single factor--trends in trade, in population and immigration, in unionization and labor market competition, in minimum wage policy, in the skill mix of the labor force, and in technology all play a role.
Drawbacks of ProtectionismTo sum up the discussion so far, the public likely has a reasonably good grasp of the benefits of free trade.
It is the perceived drawbacks to international trade that probably account for the ambivalence indicated in opinion surveys.
Some of these fears may be overstated--for example, the claim that imports lower aggregate employment.
But other concerns cannot be dismissed out of hand--especially the claim that trade leads to disruptions for some workers.
Balancing the pain for a few against the lasting gains for the economy as a whole, economists generally view the latter as outweighing the former, but it is admittedly difficult for many individuals in American society to share this assessment.
Rather than arguing the merits of international trade in the abstract, advocates of free trade might gain more traction by arguing against concrete examples of protectionism.
Each year brings new actions by the U.S. government to protect individual sectors from imports.
Antidumping duties are imposed when domestic industry is believed to be injured by the sale of imported goods at less than "fair value."
Countervailing duties are intended to counteract subsidies to foreign producers.
Safeguard actions are intended to protect a domestic industry that has been seriously injured by a surge in imports.20 As of August 2004, 359 antidumping and countervailing duty orders were in place in the United States against imports from 51 countries.21 By discouraging unfair commercial practices, such actions, in principle, promote a more stable and competitive environment for international trade.
In practice, identifying anticompetitive practices is a murky process.
For example, in antidumping cases, determining the "fair value" of a good may involve a degree of discretion, thereby complicating the assessment of whether foreign goods are being sold below their appropriate price.22 Domestic producers have a strong incentive to lobby for trade actions regardless of whether such actions are merited.
Because they inhibit free trade, protectionist actions have an array of adverse consequences that one would expect: They reduce variety and raise costs for consumers; they distort the allocation of resources in the economy by encouraging excessive resources to flow into protected sectors; and they foster inefficiency by reducing the extent of competition.
Perhaps more important in the eyes of the public, however, may be several related and highly egregious consequences of protectionist actions.
First, by raising the cost of goods that are inputs for other producers, import barriers may destroy more jobs in so-called "downstream" sectors than they save in protected sectors.
According to one study, the 2002 steel safeguard program contributed to higher steel prices that eliminated about 200,000 jobs in steel-using industries, whereas only 187,500 workers were employed by U.S. steel-producers in December 2002.23 Second, trade protection may lead to very large payouts to a small number of producers and hence is often inequitable.
Any time a product receives import protection, of course, a relatively small number of domestic producers receive benefits--through higher prices--at the cost of all domestic consumers in the economy.
On top of this, a disproportionately small number of sectors, and often a disproportionately small number of firms within a sector, tend to enjoy the gains from protection.
For example, more than one-half of the antidumping and countervailing duty orders in place as of August were on iron and steel-related products alone; by contrast, less than one-half of 1 percent of total private nonfarm employment is accounted for by iron and steel producers.24 As another example, according to a 1993 General Accounting Office study, 42 percent of the benefits to growers from sugar protection went to just 1 percent of growers.25 Although Americans favor policies designed to help the small farmer, much larger enterprises are also benefiting from agricultural trade protection.
This disturbingly inequitable distribution of the benefits of protectionism is exacerbated under current law by provisions allowing antidumping and countervailing duties to be disbursed to the companies that petitioned for the duties.
These provisions, which have been ruled illegal by the WTO, lead to protected producers being rewarded twice: Once through the higher prices stemming from the trade protection and again through the disbursal of the higher duties paid by importers.
The distribution of these payouts has been extremely skewed: For fiscal year 2003, a single firm received more than one-fourth of the $190 million in countervailing and antidumping duties that were distributed to U.S. firms.26 Import quotas (as opposed to tariffs) raise a third concern about trade protection.
By restricting the supply of certain types of imports within the United States, quotas may benefit those foreign producers who retain the right to sell to U.S. markets by raising the prices of their goods.
For example, one study found that, of the $8.6 billion in net welfare costs induced by the Multi-Fiber Agreement, which restricts textile and apparel imports, about $6 billion accrued to those foreign producers who were allotted shares of the import quotas.27 Surely, many Americans would cease to support certain types of import protections if they knew that such actions were serving to prop up the profits of foreign producers.
Finally, we must not forget that trade actions, while sometimes protecting some American workers in import-competing industries, often invite the threat of foreign retaliation that would hurt American workers in export industries.
For example, after the imposition of steel safeguard duties in March 2002, eight of our trading partners initiated safeguard investigations of their own on steel imports.
Given the importance of export markets to the most dynamic areas of U.S. manufacturing, we cannot afford to jeopardize them by inviting foreign barriers to our products.
ConclusionIn conclusion, I think it unlikely that we will see a marked global reversal of trade liberalization on the order of the restrictions enacted in the 1930s.
Policymakers have generally learned the lessons of that destructive episode.
Nevertheless, it is not inconceivable that progress in dismantling trade barriers could stall.
Many of the easiest negotiations--such as on lowering tariffs--have already taken place.
More ambitious and intrusive trade liberalizations, which often involve dismantling barriers to internal competition or cherished systems of domestic subsidies, may not have the necessary public support.
It is also possible that a multiplicity of narrow, targeted trade actions--such as antidumping or safeguard actions--could lead to a de facto rollback in the overall degree of free trade even without a concerted shift in national policies.
Thus, it is crucial to maintain public pressure for free trade.
First, it is important to continue to educate the public and create a political environment supportive of free trade.
In this respect, targeted criticisms of protectionist actions may be more effective than general paeans to free trade.
In a recent speech, my colleague, William Poole, urged journalists describing trade restrictions to ask who gains, who loses, and what is the net gain or loss for the economy as a whole?28 I very much support that sentiment.

The story alluded to the fact that, with a 25-basis-point increase in the federal funds rate target at the FOMC meeting being widely anticipated, financial-market participants planned to focus their attention instead on the statement that would accompany the announcement of the rate decision.
In doing so, they hoped to garner information about the FOMC's outlook and policy intentions that might prove useful in pricing fixed-income securities and other assets.
Indeed, it has not been uncommon in the past few years for financial markets to react more strongly to changes in the wording of the Committee's statement than to its decision about the target for the federal funds rate itself.
The increased prominence of the FOMC's post-meeting statement is best understood as the latest step in a journey toward greater transparency and openness on the part of the Committee.
This increase in transparency is highly welcome, for many reasons.
Perhaps most important, as public servants whose decisions affect the lives of every citizen, central bankers have a responsibility to provide the public as much explanation of those decisions as possible, so long as doing so does not compromise the decisionmaking process itself.
A more open policymaking process is also likely to lead to better policy decisions, because engagement with an informed public provides central bankers with useful feedback in the form of outside views and analyses.
Beyond the basic rationales of democratic accountability and engagement with the public, however, open and clear communication by the policy committee--which in practice includes speeches and congressional testimony by FOMC members, as well as official statements--makes monetary policy more effective in at least three distinct ways.
First, in the very short run, clear communication helps to increase the near-term predictability of FOMC rate decisions, which reduces risk and volatility in financial markets and allows for smoother adjustment of the economy to rate changes.
Indeed, the three recent rate hikes by the FOMC were so well anticipated that financial markets hardly responded when those actions were announced.
Second, in the long run, communicating the central bank's objectives and policy strategies can help to anchor the public's long-term expectations--most importantly, its expectations of inflation.
Public confidence that inflation will remain low in the long run has numerous benefits.
Notably, if people feel sure that inflation will remain well controlled, they will be more restrained in their wage-setting and pricing behavior, which (in something of a virtuous circle) makes it easier for the Federal Reserve to confirm their expectations by keeping inflation low.
At the same time, by reducing the risk that inflation will come loose from its moorings, well-anchored inflation expectations may afford the central bank more short-term flexibility to respond to economic disturbances that affect output and employment.
The third way in which clear and open communication enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy--the channel that will be the focus of my remarks today--is by helping to align financial-market participants' expectations about the future course of monetary policy more closely with the policy committee's own plans and projections.
As I will discuss, to the extent that central bank talk provides useful guidance to markets about the likely future path of short-term interest rates, policymakers will exert greater influence over the longer-term interest rates that most matter for spending decisions.
At the same time, expanding the information available to financial-market participants improves the efficiency and accuracy of asset pricing.
Both of these factors enhance the effectiveness and precision of monetary policy.
In the remainder of my remarks I will elaborate on the usefulness of central bank communication as a means of informing the policy expectations of financial-market participants and the public more generally.
In doing so, I will discuss some new empirical evidence on the effects of central bank communication policies in both the United States and Japan, drawn from a recent paper I prepared with two Federal Reserve colleagues.
Before proceeding, however, I should say that the views I express today are not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or in the Federal Reserve System more generally.
Communication and the Effectiveness of Monetary Policy Although people often speak of the Federal Reserve as controlling interest rates, in fact the Fed directly affects only one very short-term and (in the scheme of things) relatively unimportant interest rate, the federal funds rate.
As you may know, the federal funds rate is the interest rate at which commercial banks lend each other reserves for short periods, usually overnight.
Other than managers of bank reserves and some other traders in short-term funds, few people in the private sector have much interest in the funds rate per se.
In particular, most private-sector borrowing and investment decisions depend not on the funds rate but on longer-term yields, such as mortgage rates and corporate bond rates, and on the prices of long-lived assets, such as housing and equities.
Moreover, the link between these longer-term yields and asset prices and the current setting of the federal funds rate can be quite loose at times.
It is striking, for example, that even as the FOMC has raised its target for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points in its three meetings since June, the yield on ten-year Treasury securities has fallen by almost the same amount during that period.
This unusual recent movement in longer-term yields contrasts with most previous Fed tightening cycles, in which long-term yields typically rose, sometimes quite dramatically.
Although the relation between the FOMC's setting of the federal funds rate and the more economically relevant long-term yields is hardly direct or mechanical, a critical connection does exist.
The connection operates less through the current value of the funds rate, however, than through the interest-rate actions that the FOMC is expected to take in the future.
Specifically, financial theorists and market practitioners concur that, with risk and term premiums held constant, long-term yields move closely with the expectations that financial-market participants hold about the future evolution of the funds rate and other related short-term rates.
For example, all else being equal, if short-term rates are expected to be high on average over the relevant period, then longer-term yields will tend to be high as well.
Were that not the case, investors would profit by holding a sequence of short-term securities and declining to hold long-term bonds, an outcome inconsistent with the requirement that, in equilibrium, all securities must be willingly held.
Likewise, if future short-term rates are expected to be low on average, then long-term bond yields will tend to be low as well.
The fact that long-term yields depend at least as much on expected future values of the federal funds rate as on its current setting helps to explain the recent behavior of long-term bond yields to which I alluded a moment ago.
This June, concerns about inflation, together with a general belief that economic growth would continue to be strong, led bond traders to anticipate that the Fed would tighten policy relatively quickly.
Because the funds rate was expected to rise at a comparatively rapid pace, longer-term yields were well above short-term rates; in other words, the term structure of interest rates sloped steeply upward.
Since June, however, inflation fears have receded, and some financial-market participants have become less optimistic about the economy's near-term growth prospects.
Because of these changes in their outlook, market participants now expect the FOMC to proceed more slowly in its tightening than they did in June.1 Moreover, with inflation now expected to remain low, market participants may anticipate a lower short-term interest rate to prevail in the long run.
With expectations of future short-term rates revised downward, bond yields have declined, and the slope of the term structure is much less steep than it was a few months ago.
I hope that this brief discussion is sufficient to convince you that the current setting of the federal funds rate provides at best only partial information about the overall tightness or ease of monetary conditions.
To assess whether monetary policy is providing net stimulus or restraint to spending and the economy, one needs to know not only the current value of the funds rate but also the expected future path of the funds rate, as priced in financial markets.
But how are private-sector expectations of the FOMC's future policy actions formed in the first place?
We come now to the nub of why central bank communications are so important.
Without guidance from the central bank, market participants can do no better than form expectations based on the average past behavior of monetary policymakers, a strategy that may be adequate under some or even most circumstances but may be seriously misguided in others.
In contrast, when the monetary policy committee regularly provides information about its objectives, economic outlook, and policy plans, two benefits result.
First, with more complete information available, markets will price financial assets more efficiently.
Second, the policymakers will usually find that they have achieved a closer alignment between market participants' expectations about the course of future short-term rates and their own views.
By guiding market expectations in this way, the policy committee attains increased influence over the most economically relevant long-term yields, reduced financial and economic uncertainty, and, in all probability, better economic outcomes.
These potential benefits have not been lost on Federal Reserve policymakers.
Certainly, the development of the FOMC's post-meeting statement over the past decade suggests an increasing awareness of the practical advantages of increased transparency and communication.
As hard as it may be to imagine, given the prominence afforded to FOMC statements today, before 1994 the FOMC issued no post-meeting statement, not even an announcement of its decision about the federal funds rate.
Instead, in most instances, the Committee signaled its decision to financial markets only indirectly through the open-market operations used to affect the rate.2 In February 1994, the FOMC began to release statements to note changes in its target for the federal funds rate but continued to remain silent after meetings with no policy changes.
Statements have been released after every meeting only since May 1999.
The FOMC statements have evolved considerably.
In their current form, they provide a brief description of the state of the economy and a somewhat formulaic description of the so-called balance of risks with respect to the outlook for output growth and inflation.
The "balance-of-risks" part of the statement replaced an earlier formulation, known as the "policy tilt," which loosely characterized the likely future direction of the federal funds rate.
The balance-of-risks portion of the statement also provides information about the likely course of policy, but it does so more indirectly by describing the Committee's assessment of the potential risks to its dual objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability rather than by commenting on the policy rate itself.
Most recently, the Committee has introduced additional commentary on the outlook for policy into its statement.
For example, the August 2003 statement of the FOMC indicated that "policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period," a formulation replaced a few meetings later with the comment that the Committee could be "patient" in removing policy accommodation.
These statements conveyed information to markets about the Committee's economic outlook as well as its policy approach.
In my view, this language served an important purpose, illustrating in the process the value of central bank communication.
At the time that "considerable period" was introduced, the market was pricing in a significant degree of near-term policy tightening, presumably on the expectation that the sharp pickup in growth in the third quarter of 2003 would induce the FOMC to raise rates.
However, this market reaction placed insufficient weight, I believe, on the fact that the expansion that began in mid-2003 was characterized by exceptional gains in labor productivity, which implied in turn that the rapid growth in output did not materially increase the pressure on resources.
With inflation low and with continuing slack in resource utilization, the rapid tightening projected by the markets did not appear justified, the surge in output growth notwithstanding.
The language of the statement in August 2003 and subsequent meetings persuaded the markets that an autumn tightening was not in the cards, and market expectations adjusted accordingly.
Crucially, this change in expectations resulted in lower interest rates at all maturities, a development that helped support the expansion in the latter part of last year.
When the policy tightening cycle finally began earlier this year, the FOMC indicated that, with underlying inflation still relatively low, it would proceed "at a pace that is likely to be measured."
As I discussed in a speech in May, the gradualist approach implied by this statement is often appropriate during a period of economic and financial uncertainty (Bernanke, 2004).
At the same time that it provided information on its outlook and its expected policy path, however, the Committee properly insisted that its policies would be conditional on the arriving economic data.
In particular, the Committee noted that it would respond as necessary to maintain price stability.
To be absolutely clear, in pointing out the benefits of clear communication I am not asserting that central bank talk represents an independent tool of policy.
Indeed, if the central bank's statements are not informative about the likely future course of the short-term interest rate, they will soon lose their ability to influence market expectations.
Rather, the value of more-open communication is that it clarifies the central bank's views and intentions, thereby increasing the likelihood that financial-market participants' rate expectations will be similar to those of the policymakers themselves--or, if views differ, ensuring at least that the difference can not be attributed to the policymakers' failure to communicate their outlook, objectives, and strategy to the public and the markets.
Do FOMC Statements Affect Policy Expectations?
Some Evidence In my remarks thus far I have argued in general terms that FOMC communication can help inform the public's expectations of the future course of short-term interest rates, providing the Committee with increased influence over longer-term rates and hence a greater ability to achieve its macroeconomic objectives.
Casual observation confirms that market participants do pay close attention to FOMC statements and that these statements often move markets.
But have FOMC statements had the effects that were intended?
And how important have these effects been, relative to the impact of the rate-setting decision itself?
With two Federal Reserve colleagues, Vincent Reinhart and Brian Sack, I recently developed new empirical evidence on these questions, some highlights of which I will briefly share with you today (Bernanke, Reinhart, and Sack, 2004).3 The effects of FOMC actions and statements are reflected most clearly and directly in financial markets; so to try to measure these effects my coauthors and I studied the responses to FOMC decisions of some key interest rates and asset prices.
More specifically, we observed financial-market developments over the period beginning fifteen minutes before and ending forty-five minutes after each policy decision became known to the public.4 The advantage of restricting the analysis to a short period spanning the Committee's decision is that the changes in yields or asset prices occurring within that narrow window are more likely to reflect the impact of the decision, as opposed to the arrival of other information about the economy.
We included in our data set all FOMC policy decisions since July 1991--both those taken at regular meetings and those made between meetings, a total of 116 decisions.
Of these 116 policy decisions, 56 were accompanied by an official statement, and 60 did not involve a statement.
Of greatest interest to us was determining how FOMC actions and statements affected the expectations of financial-market participants about the likely future course of the federal funds rate.
A variety of financial instruments convey information about these expectations.
In our work we focused on a particular futures contract (a Eurodollar futures contract), which provides a good measure of what the market expects the federal funds rate to be at a horizon of about one year.5 By observing the change in the price of that contract in the period around each FOMC decision, we were able to infer how that decision affected year-ahead policy expectations.
Moreover, the fact that our data set included some decisions accompanied by statements and some without statements allowed us to separate the effects of rate actions and statements on policy expectations and, consequently, on longer-term yields.
Our findings support the view that FOMC statements have proven a powerful tool for affecting market expectations about the future course of the federal funds rate.6 Certainly, the market's expectations for year-ahead rates respond to unexpected changes in the FOMC's target for the federal funds rate, as we would expect.
However, as most rate actions are well anticipated by financial markets, changes in the federal funds rate alone account for only a small portion of the change in expectations around FOMC decisions.7 Over the short period around a policy decision, FOMC statements, not the rate-setting action itself, have the greater influence on year-ahead rate expectations, particularly when the content of the statement is not fully anticipated by market participants.8 For example, according to our estimates, a policy statement that surprises the market leads market participants to revise their year-ahead rate expectations about 14 basis points more than they would have in the absence of such a statement.
We also confirmed that FOMC statements tend to move market beliefs in the direction one would have expected.
In particular, statements that were unexpectedly "hawkish" in tone--that is, statements that seemed to indicate that future policies might involve higher rates than previously thought--resulted in increases in year-ahead policy expectations of between 12 and 16 basis points on average, whereas "dovish" statements led to similar decreases in rate expectations.
The largest effects on policy expectations and yields were observed following FOMC statements that directly addressed the likely future evolution of policy, such as the August 2003 statement that invoked the "considerable period" and the January 2004 statement that introduced the phraseology that the Committee "can be patient."
There seems to be little doubt that FOMC statements can have a substantial influence on year-ahead policy expectations.
We found that they influence expectations and rates beyond the one-year horizon, as well.
For example, we calculated that the content of FOMC statements accounts for about 68 percent of the variability in the five-year Treasury yield in the hour around FOMC decisions.
By contrast, the Committee's decision about where to set the funds rate explains only 12 percent of the variance in the five-year yield, with the remaining 20 percent of the variance reflecting other influences.

In the modern history of the Federal Reserve, the action it took on October 6, 1979, stands out as such a milestone and arguably as a turning point in our nation's economic history.
The policy change initiated under the leadership of Chairman Paul Volcker on that Saturday morning in Washington rescued our nation's economy from a dangerous path of ever-escalating inflation and instability.
As I noted in congressional testimony before the Joint Economic Committee on November 5 of that year: We are here … to evaluate the moves of Chairman Volcker and his colleagues last month, implying that some alternate policies were feasible at that time.
However, given the state of the world financial markets, had the Fed not opted to initiate a sharp interest rate increase in this country, the market would have done it for us.1 In a democratic society such as ours, the central bank is entrusted by the Congress, and ultimately by the citizenry, with the tremendous responsibility of guarding the purchasing power of money.
It is now generally recognized that price stability is a prerequisite for the efficient allocation of resources in our economy and, indeed, for fulfilling our ultimate mandate to promote maximum sustainable employment over time.
But the importance of price stability has sometimes been insufficiently appreciated in our central bank's history, and, as Allan Meltzer will soon point out, such episodes have had unfortunate consequences.
Far from being a bulwark of stability in the 1970s, the Federal Reserve conducted policies that, in the judgment of many analysts, inadvertently contributed to an environment of macroeconomic instability.
We should strive to retain in the collective memory of our institution the ensuing lessons of that period.
It may be the most fruitful and proper way to commemorate the events of October a quarter-century ago.
Tracing the roots of the 1970s inflation brings us to an earlier era.
The Keynesian revolution of the 1930s and its subsequent empirical application led many economists to accept the view that through regulation, state intervention, and the macroeconomic management of aggregate demand, government policies, including those of our nation's central bank, could improve on earlier efforts to achieve and maintain “full employment.” By the 1960s, policymakers seemed to concentrate their short-run objectives on maintaining a “high pressure” economy in the belief that such a recipe could virtually thwart economic contractions at little or no risk to long-run stability and growth.
If this high-pressure management inadvertently carried the economy beyond its productive potential, some cost in terms of inflation could be expected, but such costs appeared tolerable in light of the employment gains that came with them.
Furthermore, policymakers hoped that additional tools at their disposal--so-called incomes policies enforced by “jawboning,” guideposts, and price and wage controls--were ready to combat and control any resulting upcreep in inflation with minimal macroeconomic cost.
By the turn of the 1970s, the ugly reality of stagflation forced an overhaul of this policy framework.
The corrosive influence of inflation on our nation's productive potential was beginning to take hold.
Policymakers slowly came to recognize the adverse long-term consequences of compromising the purchasing power of our currency for economic well being.
Indeed, by the late 1970s, a consensus gradually emerged that inflation destroyed jobs rather than facilitating their creation.
Unfortunately, a legacy of failed attempts during the decade to restore stability with gradualist plans and with various incarnations of incomes policies took its toll on business and household attitudes toward inflation and toward the prospects of our nation.
By the end of the decade, an inflationary psychology had become well entrenched and complicated efforts to restore a sense of stability in the national psyche.
Little leeway for policy was left before the Federal Reserve took decisive action on October 6, 1979.
In retrospect, the policy put in place on that day was the obvious and necessary solution to the nation's troubles.
As events unfolded, however, the Federal Reserve did not escape criticism, and for a time it was not entirely obvious that the System could maintain the necessary public support to see its disinflationary efforts come to fruition.
Though widely anticipated even before the actions of October, the recession and retrenchment in employment that followed those actions resulted in pressures on the Federal Reserve to reverse course.
The fiftieth anniversary of the beginning of the Great Depression--the crash of 1929--was observed later during that same month, October 1979.
I recall that this anniversary not only rekindled the question of whether such an event could recur but also inflamed sensitivities regarding the effects on unemployment that might stem from the new anti-inflationary action.
Judging from the fate of earlier attempts during the 1970s to tame inflation in the face of a weakening economy, when short-run considerations appeared to trump policies oriented toward longer horizons, such fears of rising unemployment could have also derailed the reforms of October.
In the event, they did not.
We owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to Chairman Volcker and to the Federal Open Market Committee for their leadership and steadfastness on that important occasion and for restoring the public’s faith in our nation's currency.
By the time that I arrived at the Federal Reserve, in 1987, the task of the Federal Open Market Committee had become easier precisely because of the perseverance and success of our predecessors in the turbulent years following October 1979.
Maintaining an environment of stability is simpler than restoring the public’s faith in the soundness of our currency.

