Price stability is our responsibility as central banks--it is how, in the long run, we contribute to society's welfare.
Achieving and maintaining price stability will be more efficient and effective the better we understand the causes of inflation and the dynamics of how it evolves.
1 I think central bankers are asking more of inflation analysis these days.
In the United States, our attention was focused for many years on containing and then reducing inflation.
The risks and rewards were one-sided, and policymakers were mostly interested in whether inflation would rise.
Now that we are in the neighborhood of price stability, we can be faced with looking at the possibility that inflation will fall too low as well as rise too high.
Moreover, so long as inflation expectations are well anchored, we can tolerate limited changes in inflation, but we need to know that a rise or fall is not the beginning of a more extended trend.
Consequently, we focus closely on the reasons for any changes in inflation and their implications for the outlook.
Of course, I have always known how important the analysis and forecasting of inflation was for monetary policy, but I must admit that as someone who now has to go on record with a vote on the basis of some notion of the future course of inflation, the exercise has taken on added meaning.
I thought I might take advantage of this captive audience of researchers on central bank policies to ruminate a bit on the evolution of inflation modeling and suggest areas for further research.
I know that European central banks have been in the forefront of recent efforts to improve our understanding of some key issues in this area, but I will focus on our practices in the United States.
The Stability of the Basic Framework I find it remarkable how fundamentally stable our basic framework for analyzing inflation has remained over the past thirty-five years or so: That basic framework is essentially the expectations-augmented Phillips curve introduced by Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps in the late 1960s.2 One of the key assumptions underlying this basic framework is the temporary rigidity of wages and prices.
It is because of these nominal rigidities that monetary shocks have real effects: In the well-known litany, wages and prices do not change immediately in response to a positive monetary surprise, so real interest rates fall, and spending is stimulated.
But higher demand cannot be met without pushing firms up their marginal cost curves as they compete for scarce labor and other resources.
As opportunities to raise prices present themselves, firms take them to better align prices with costs.
That process may be gradual, because firms' competitors may not be raising their prices at the same time.
It is easy to see in this tale the central mechanism of the Phillips curve.
What is missing from the story, though, is that seminal feature of Friedman and Phelps's framework, namely, expectations.
Expectations are a key part of the framework because wages and prices will be set for some time, and so it is important for workers and firms to consider the economic conditions expected to prevail during the period that the wages and prices are fixed.
If inflation is anticipated over the period ahead, wages and prices will be set commensurately higher as workers and firms strive to protect themselves against the erosion of their purchasing power.
As Friedman and Phelps emphasized, these efforts to protect against the erosion of purchasing power by inflation will mean that an ongoing and fully anticipated inflation will, to a first approximation, have no effect on the level of resource utilization; the outcome of the economy will be whatever the real forces at work dictate.
Friedman called the unemployment rate determined by such real factors the natural rate of unemployment.
An important implication of the expectations-augmented Phillips curve is that any attempt to use monetary policy to lower the unemployment rate below the natural rate on a sustained basis will end in failure.
Initially, expansionary monetary policy would lower unemployment as well as raise inflation.
As the stimulus continued, however, firms and workers would increasingly protect themselves against the higher inflation, giving an additional boost to inflation.
Eventually, there would be no additional employment; only a (self-reinforcing) higher rate of inflation.
In 1970, the Federal Reserve held a conference that addressed this then-new framework; the conference encompassed both theoretical extensions, including Lucas' first exposition of rational expectations, and empirical implementation.3 In its essentials, the way we forecast inflation today is not all that different from what came out of that conference.
That is, inflation is importantly a function of an output or employment gap relative to a natural rate, plus some measure of inflation expectations.
Advances within the Basic Framework One of the first challenges that the new framework had to face was the supply shocks of the early 1970s.
The framework was extended to allow for the effects of shifts in relative prices, such as crude oil and import prices.
Such shifts can feed through fairly directly to the measures of core inflation through their effect on business costs, though their influence on inflation should be temporary unless they get built into labor costs or inflation expectations.
We include these types of price terms today in our forecasting equations, and they are important to forming our views of the inflation outlook and thus to the policy process.
Another early development within the framework was the buttressing of its microeconomic foundations, in particular by paying more careful attention to the modeling of nominal rigidities.
John Taylor's staggered-contracts framework remains a touchstone because of its intuitive appeal--annual wage reviews are a familiar experience for most people who work.
Much subsequent work--including, recently, among economists at the European Central Bank and the euro-area national central banks--has confirmed the key assumption underlying this model, which is that wages and prices are changed infrequently.
A key objective of Taylor's staggered-contracts model was to show that, in an economy with nominal rigidities, monetary policy can have important effects even when expectations are perfectly rational.
However, about a decade ago, Jeff Fuhrer and George Moore pointed out that inflation was more persistent than was predicted by the model with sticky prices and rational expectations.4 Since their work, a number of researchers have suggested that "sticky information" or rules of thumb can account for this excess persistence.
Such departures of expectations from perfect rationality can be an important source of observed inflation dynamics.
At the Fed, the staff takes a number of different approaches to the modeling of expectations.
The staff's large, formal model (FRB/US) assumes rational expectations--but with a twist.
In particular, the model addresses the Fuhrer-Moore critique by making inflation itself, as well as the levels of wages and prices, costly to adjust.
The implications of these additional frictions are very similar to those of the departures of expectations from perfect rationality used by other modelers.
An advantage of a model with expectations that are, at least in part, rational is that we can address questions related to how the behavior of the economy may change when the systematic implementation of monetary policy changes.
We also look at models that assume that inflation expectations are well modeled by lagged inflation--the original proposal of Friedman and of Phelps.
Such models may not be as useful in addressing policy questions.
However, they have a good forecasting track record.
The Performance of the Board Staff's Inflation Forecast The Board staff forecasts distributed to the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) are judgmental: Although the staff consults a variety of models in coming up with its forecasts, no one model can be said to summarize the staff view.
Also, the staff forecasts are not necessarily its best guess on how inflation will evolve; the forecasts are conditioned on an assumed path for monetary policy and, during some periods, at the behest of policymakers, the staff did not assume what it would have viewed as the most likely policy path.
I have distributed a figure that shows the Board staff's four-quarter-ahead forecasts for inflation as measured by the core Consumer Price Index along with the actual outcomes.
The period shown is 1984 to 2000; I chose those years because the current definition of the core CPI did not come into use until 1983, and the staff's forecasts remain confidential for five years.
As shown in the inset box, the root-mean-squared error of the staff projections has been smaller than that of a naïve benchmark model, in which inflation is assumed to continue at its pace over the preceding four quarters.
Nonetheless, the one-year-ahead root-mean-squared error of the staff forecast is about 1/2 percentage point.
That is to say, almost one-third of the time, inflation has been either more than 1/2 percentage point higher, or more than 1/2 percentage point lower, than the staff has predicted.
Moreover, over the period shown, there was, on average, some bias in the staff's inflation forecasts; inflation has tended to come in lower than the staff anticipated, by about 0.2 percentage point per year.
No single explanation suggests itself for either the extent of the misses or the bias.
Rather, a variety of factors has caused inflation to deviate from expectations.5 At times, demand was not as robust as anticipated, and unexpected but persistent changes in the foreign exchange value of the dollar and oil prices fed through to core CPI inflation on several occasions.
But I will concentrate on one general phenomenon and two episodes that help illustrate how our understanding has evolved and some of the more general challenges for inflation forecasting over the past twenty years.
One factor that may account for some of the upward bias over this entire period was a gradual reduction in the natural rate of unemployment.
With hindsight, I believe we can point to a number of developments in labor markets that are consistent with such a reduction.
For example, disability insurance rolls rose steadily over this period, which allowed many people who likely would have had above-average unemployment rates to withdraw from the labor force.
Also, in the early 1990s, many public opinion surveys indicated a sharp increase in worker insecurity--and workers who are anxious about losing their jobs will be less willing to risk unemployment.
These examples illustrate the need to be alert to the possibility of the natural rate shifting.
As Friedman emphasized, the natural rate is not a rigid data point, but rather the reflection of many developments in the economy.
In the 1988-90 period, the behavior of crude oil prices, unemployment, and the exchange rate were not especially surprising or anomalous.
However, the models the staff was consulting in preparing its forecasts may have been miscalibrated.
In particular, inflation expectations perhaps were becoming better anchored, so that an unemployment rate below the natural rate was putting less pressure on inflation than it would have over the preceding twenty years.
Likewise, the staff may have overestimated the ongoing effects of the dollar decline on inflation, as the models in use at that time inevitably gave considerable weight to the experience of the 1970s.
Empirical estimates unavoidably lag these sorts of endogenous changes in inflation dynamics.
For the period from 1996 to 1998, inflation also came in consistently lower than the staff forecast.
Here, the pick up in structural productivity growth was the likely cause: The historical record suggests that a sustained acceleration in productivity affects prices before it affects wages.
Thus, the pickup in productivity growth has a direct, depressing effect on costs--and thus ultimately on prices.
It took Fed forecasters--and others--a while to discern the acceleration in productivity and its implications for inflation.
Interestingly, by the time of the forecasts made in 1998 and 1999--the 1999 and 2000 observations on the chart--the string of forecasting errors had ended.
This improved performance likely reflected the eventual recognition that productivity growth had increased on a sustained basis.
An Agenda for Further Research As I noted at the beginning of my remarks, research aimed at improving our understanding of and ability to predict inflation is essential to the central banker's mission.
The better the forecasts, the better the odds that policy choices will contribute to economic stability and efficient resource allocation.
Needless to say, more work remains to be done--and always will.
My chart stops at 2000, but it is no secret that forecasters everywhere did not anticipate the extent of disinflation in the U.S. economy in 2003 and, even after the fact, have had trouble explaining what happened.
Moreover, the degree to which core inflation picked up in 2004 and 2005 also caught many economists, including this one on the FOMC, by surprise.
Surprises are inevitable; aggregate supply and demand curves shift for reasons that cannot be anticipated.
But improvement should be possible in several dimensions.
We could identify shocks sooner and get a better understanding of their likely effects on inflation.
And we could attempt to narrow the definition of "shock."
I suspect that much of what we consider to be exogenous is the working out of endogenous events that we do not understand very well.
Better predictions inevitably begin with improved understanding--both theoretical and empirical.
In reviewing some of the advances of the past thirty-five years for this talk, I was struck by the degree to which so much of the work on rigidities and expectations seemed to be trying to find an elegant rationale at the level of the firm and the worker for the observed dynamic properties of aggregate price measures.
This work, while illuminating in many respects, does not seem to have greatly advanced the empirical forecasting of inflation.
And, the microeconomic behaviors we describe to justify the empirical specifications of our macroeconomic models often do not coincide very well with what we find when we directly observe the decisionmaking of workers and firms.
I think we need to push forward along these microeconomic lines.
I have a lengthy list of macroeconomic inflation puzzles whose answers would make me a better policymaker, but, for the most part, the solutions to the puzzles rest on a better understanding of how workers and firms set wages and prices.
Researchers at the ECB and at the euro-area national central banks have made an important contribution in their recent work.
I agree with one of the conclusions I understand many of them came to--that is, we especially need to improve our understanding of the determinants of labor compensation.
The reduced-form price equations we so often use for inflation prediction bypass direct contact with labor compensation issues.
But the labor market is at the foundation of the Friedman-Phelps analysis.
Labor is the major element of business cost and as such often occupies a prominent role in policy discussions of inflation prospects, and the unemployment rate often proxies for resource slack more generally.
As I have already discussed, unanticipated changes in the natural rate have contributed to forecasting errors over the past two decades.
In the past few years, we have had some experience with wage setting under conditions of price stability, and nominal compensation showed greater flexibility than some observers had anticipated.
Too often, discussions of wage and compensation determination rely on descriptions of worker demands and expectations that seem drawn from an era of strong unions rather than from the more atomistic labor markets that dominate the U.S. economy these days.
A better understanding of the motivation and dynamics of how compensation is determined between firms and individuals or small groups of workers would help unravel a number of the inflation puzzles I think we face, including those involving productivity growth, globalization, markups, and expectations formation.
Changes in Productivity Growth An important aspect of this story has been that productivity affects prices before it affects wages--that is why we were able to experience low and stable inflation in the latter part of the 1990s with the unemployment rate well below any estimates of its natural level.
But is it really true that prices are more responsive to productivity than wages?
Why?
Should the effects be symmetrical when productivity growth slows?
How can we better estimate structural productivity and determine changes in its pace of growth more promptly?
Globalization and the Inflation Process Several observers have argued that increased trade has been an important factor in the downtrend in inflation over the past two decades.6 One channel is said to be through greater competitive pressures and another through increased support for price stability engendered by the competitive environment.
Globalization might restrain prices and wages in those sectors in which imports play an increasing role, but how does it hold back the average wage and price level?
And, how do we reconcile the sense of greater competitive pressures with record levels of profits--and capital income more generally--in the United States?
The Behavior of Profit Margins or Markups The Federal Reserve's 1970 conference and much of the work since then has approached the determination of inflation as a two-step process: model both labor costs and the price markup over labor costs.
Yet, we find that this approach does not work very well in practice.
Years of experience suggest that although profit margins tend to return to their mean, deviations can increase for a time and the eventual return can be slow and very difficult to predict.
In the United States, markups have remained unusually elevated of late, absorbing little of the rise in the cost of energy, import, and materials.
Does it matter whether the shock to margins comes from a change in potential supply or aggregate demand?
What type of pricing behavior reconciles these outcomes?
How are they consistent with the expectation that margins return to means?
Inflation Expectations Measures of inflation expectations are among the variables I watch most closely as I formulate my policy recommendations because I recognize that changing expectations are a principal avenue by which short-term perturbations in price levels are propagated into more persistent changes in inflation rates.
Yet our knowledge of the expectations that businesses and workers bring to the process of setting wages and prices is extremely limited.
We use proxies--most often surveys of economists, whose projections may be influenced by their knowledge of other economists' projections, and of households, who may or may not understand the question or have a realistic view of what to expect.
Readings from the financial markets are helpful, but they are also muddied by changing premiums for inflation risk and liquidity, and they are not necessarily representative of the attitudes of households or businesses.
Moreover, how expectations are formed remains an area that would benefit from further research.
How much do people rely on the immediate past in forming expectations about the future?
To what extent are projections from the past modified by what they know about the goals of the central bank or the stage and characteristics of the current economic cycle?
How often do expectations get updated, and what types of information are used in the process?

But we have also been subjected to other shocks, the most immediately prominent ones being the oil and gas price surges of the past two years.
Indeed, most analysts attribute the economic soft spots of the past two years to energy shocks.
Accordingly, I will devote the rest of my formal remarks to developments in oil and gas markets, and I will endeavor to address broader issues of the world economy in the question and answer period.
* * * World markets for oil and natural gas have been subject to a degree of strain over the past year not experienced for a generation.
Increased demand and lagging additions to productive capacity have combined to eliminate a significant amount of the slack in energy markets that was essential in containing energy prices between 1985 and 2000.
Reflecting a low short-term elasticity of demand, higher prices in recent months have slowed the growth of oil demand, but only modestly.
That slowdown, coupled with expanded production also induced by the price firmness, required markets to absorb an unexpected pickup in the pace of inventory accumulation.
The initial response was a marked drop in spot prices for light, sweet crude oil.
But that drop left forward prices sufficiently above spot prices to create an above-normal rate of return for oil bought for inventory and hedged, even after storage and interest costs are accounted for.
As I indicated in early April, this emerging condition could encourage the buildup of enough of an inventory buffer to damp the price frenzy.
Indeed, since early April, private crude oil inventories in the United States have been accumulated at a seasonally adjusted rate of around 250,000 barrels a day, rising as of last week to the highest seasonally adjusted level in three years.
A somewhat lesser, but still important, accumulation of crude oil is evident in other major countries.
Inventory accumulation is likely to continue unless demand rises, output declines, or we run out of storage capacity.
In the United States, natural gas prices in recent weeks, seasonally adjusted, have come off their peak of early April, but those prices still remain significantly above the average level of 2004.
Working levels of gas inventories are seasonally moderate, but domestic dry gas production plus net imports has not expanded sufficiently over the past few years to have prevented a marked rise in price.
The inexorable rise in residential and utility use has priced the more marginal industrial gas users partially out of the market and has induced significant gains in gas efficiency among a number of gas users, such as petroleum refineries, steel mills, and paper and board mills.
Industrial gas use overall in the United States has declined 12 percent since 1998.
* * * For both oil and natural gas, the inventory, production, and price outlook beyond the current episode will doubtless continue to reflect longer-term concerns.
Much will depend on the response of demand to price over the longer run.
Prices of spot crude oil and natural gas have risen sharply over the past year in response to constrained supply and the firming of overall demand.
But if history is any guide, should higher prices persist, energy use over time will continue to decline relative to gross domestic product (GDP).
In the wake of sharply higher prices, the energy intensity of the United States economy has been reduced about half since the early 1970s.
Much of that displacement was achieved by 1985.
Progress in reducing energy intensity has continued since then, but at a lessened pace.
This more-modest rate of decline in energy intensity should not be surprising, given the generally lower level of real oil prices that prevailed between 1985 and 2000.
With real energy prices again on the rise, more-rapid decreases in the intensity of use in the years ahead seem virtually inevitable.
As would be expected, long-term demand elasticities have proved noticeably higher than those evident in the short term.
* * * Altering the magnitude and manner of U.S. energy consumption will significantly affect the path of the U.S. economy over the long term.
For years, long-term prospects for oil and gas prices appeared benign.
When choosing capital projects, businesses in the past could mostly look through short-run fluctuations in oil and natural gas prices, with an anticipation that moderate prices would prevail over the longer haul.
The recent shift in expectations, however, has been substantial enough and persistent enough to direct business-investment decisions in favor of energy-cost reduction.
Of critical importance will be the extent to which the more than 200 million light vehicles on U.S. highways, which consume 11 percent of total world oil production, become more fuel efficient as vehicle buyers choose the lower fuel costs of lighter or hybrid vehicles.
We can expect similar increases in oil and energy efficiency in the rapidly growing economies of East Asia as they respond to the same set of market incentives.
But at present, China consumes roughly twice as much oil per dollar of GDP as the United States, and if, as projected, its share of world oil consumption continues to increase, the average improvements in world oil-intensity will be less pronounced than the improvements in individual countries viewed separately would suggest.
* * * Aside from uncertain demand, the resolution of current major geopolitical uncertainties will materially affect oil prices in the years ahead.
The effect on oil prices, in turn, will significantly influence the levels of investment over the next decade in crude oil productive capacity and, only slightly less importantly, investment in refining facilities.
Because of the geographic concentration of proved reserves, much of the investment in crude oil productive capacity will need to be made in countries where foreign investment is prohibited or restricted or faces considerable political risk.
Unless those policies and political institutions and attitudes change, a greater proportion of the cash flow of producing countries will be needed for oil re-investment to ensure that capacity keeps up with projected world demand.
Concerns about potential shortfalls in investment certainly have contributed to recent record-high long-term futures prices.
To be sure, world oil supplies and productive capacity continue to expand.
Major advances in recovery rates from existing reservoirs have enhanced proved reserves despite ever-fewer discoveries of major oil fields.
But investment to convert reserves to productive capacity has fallen short of the levels required to match unexpected recent gains in demand, especially gains in China.
Besides feared shortfalls in crude oil capacity, the status of world refining capacity has become worrisome as well.
Of special concern is the need to add adequate coking and desulphurization capacity to convert the average gravity and sulphur content of much of the world's crude oil to the lighter and sweeter needs of product markets, which are increasingly dominated by transportation fuels that must meet ever-more stringent environmental requirements.
* * * The extraordinary uncertainties about oil prices of late are reminiscent of the early years of oil development.
Over the past few decades, crude oil prices have been determined largely by international market participants, especially OPEC.
But such was not always the case.
In the early twentieth century, pricing power was firmly in the hands of Americans, predominately John D. Rockefeller and Standard Oil.
Reportedly appalled by the volatility of crude oil prices in the early years of the petroleum industry, Rockefeller endeavored with some success to control those prices.
After the breakup of Standard Oil in 1911, pricing power remained with the United States--first with the U.S. oil companies and later with the Texas Railroad Commission, which raised allowable output to suppress price spikes and cut output to prevent sharp price declines.
Indeed, as late as 1952, U.S. crude oil production (44 percent of which was in Texas) still accounted for more than half of the world total.
However, that historical role came to an end in 1971, when excess crude oil capacity in the United States was finally absorbed by rising demand.
At that point, the marginal pricing of oil, which for so long had been resident on the Gulf Coast of Texas, moved to the Persian Gulf.
To capitalize on their newly acquired pricing power, many producing nations in the Middle East nationalized their oil companies.
But the full magnitude of their pricing power became evident only in the aftermath of the oil embargo of 1973.
During that period, posted crude oil prices at Ras Tanura, Saudi Arabia, rose to more than $11 per barrel, significantly above the $1.80 per barrel that had been unchanged from 1961 to 1970.
A further surge in oil prices accompanied the Iranian Revolution in 1979.
The higher prices of the 1970s brought to an abrupt end the extraordinary period of growth in U.S. consumption of oil and the increased intensity of its use that was so evident in the decades immediately following World War II.
Between 1945 and 1973, consumption of petroleum products rose at a startling average annual rate of 4-1/2 percent, well in excess of growth of real GDP.
However, between 1973 and 2004, oil consumption grew, on average, only 1/2 percent per year, far short of the rise in real GDP.
Although OPEC production quotas have been a significant factor in price determination for a third of a century, the story since 1973 has been as much about the power of markets as it has been about power over markets.
The signals provided by market prices have eventually resolved even the most seemingly insurmountable difficulties of inadequate domestic supply in the United States.
The gap projected between supply and demand in the immediate post-1973 period was feared by many to be so large that rationing would be the only practical solution.
But the resolution did not occur quite that way.
To be sure, mandated fuel-efficiency standards for cars and light trucks induced slower growth of gasoline demand.
Some observers argue, however, that, even without government-enforced standards, market forces would have produced increased fuel efficiency.
Indeed, the number of small, fuel-efficient Japanese cars that were imported into the United States markets rose throughout the 1970s as the price of oil moved higher.
Moreover, at that time, prices were expected to go still higher.
Our Department of Energy, for example, had baseline projections showing prices reaching $60 per barrel--the equivalent of about twice that amount in today's prices.
The failure of oil prices to rise as projected in the late 1970s is a testament to the power of markets and the technologies they foster.
Today, despite its recent surge, the average price of crude oil in real terms is still only three-quarters of the price peak of February 1981.
Moreover, the effect of the current surge in oil prices, though noticeable, is likely to prove less consequential to economic growth and inflation than in the 1970s.
Since the end of 2003, the rise in the value of imported oil--essentially a tax on U.S. residents--has amounted to about 3/4 percent of GDP.
The effects were far larger in the crises of the 1970s.
But, obviously, the risk of more-serious negative consequences would intensify if oil prices were to move materially higher.
* * * U.S. natural gas prices have historically displayed greater volatility than prices of crude oil, doubtless reflecting, in part, the less-advanced development of price-damping global trade in natural gas.
Over the past few years, notwithstanding markedly higher drilling activity, the U.S. natural gas industry has been unable to noticeably expand production or to increase imports from Canada.
Significant upward pressure on prices has ensued.
North America's limited capacity to import liquefied natural gas (LNG) has effectively restricted our access to the world's abundant supplies of gas.
Because international trade in natural gas has been insufficient to equalize prices across markets, U.S. natural gas prices since late 2002 have been notably higher, on average, than prices abroad.
As a result, significant segments of the North American gas-using industry are in a weakened competitive position.
Indeed, ammonia and fertilizer plants in the United States have been particularly hard hit as the costs of domestic feedstocks have risen relative to those abroad.
The difficulties associated with inadequate domestic supplies will eventually be resolved as consumers and producers react to the signals provided by market prices.
Indeed, the process is already under way.
As a result of substantial cost reductions for liquefaction and transportation of LNG, significant global trade in natural gas is developing.
This activity has accelerated sharply over the past few years as profitable arbitrage has emerged in natural gas prices across international markets.
At the liquefaction end of the process, new investments are in the works across the globe.
Enormous tankers to transport LNG are being constructed, even though they are not dedicated to specific long-term delivery contracts.
The increasing availability of LNG around the world should lead to much greater flexibility and efficiency in the allocation of energy resources.
According to tabulations of BP, worldwide imports of natural gas in 2003 were only 24 percent of world consumption, compared with 59 percent for oil.
Clearly, the gas trade has significant margin to exercise its price-damping opportunities.
In the United States, import terminals in Georgia and in Maryland have reopened after having been mothballed for more than two decades.
The added capacity led to a noticeable increase in imports of LNG last year, but LNG imports still accounted for less than 3 percent of U.S. consumption.
Additional import facilities, both onshore and offshore, are being developed.
A new offshore facility in the Gulf of Mexico received its first delivery of liquefied natural gas a little more than a month ago.
According to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, the number of approved and proposed new or expanded LNG import terminals in the United States stood at thirty-three earlier this month.
Together they have capacity for 15 trillion cubic feet of imports annually, far in excess of any pending consumption needs, which in 2004 amounted to 22 trillion cubic feet.
Clearly, not all of these projects will come to fruition.
Some will be abandoned for economic and business considerations, and others will fail because of local opposition, motivated by environmental, safety, and other concerns.
The larger question, of course, is what will increased world trade in LNG and expanded U.S. import capacity do to natural gas prices in the United States?
During the past couple of years, when U.S. prices of natural gas hovered around $6 per million Btu, import prices of LNG in Europe have ranged between $2 and $4, and those in Japan and Korea have generally been between $3 and $5.
Estimates of production and delivery costs of LNG to North America appear to hover around $3.
In the short run, exporters to the United States are likely to receive our domestic price, currently above $6 per million Btu.
But unless world gas markets tighten aggressively, competitive pressures will arbitrage the U.S. natural gas price down, possibly significantly, through increased imports.
In addition to expanded supplies from abroad, North America still has numerous unexploited sources of gas production.
Significant quantities of recoverable gas reserves are located in Alaska and the northern territories of Canada.
Negotiations over the construction of pipelines connecting these northern supplies to existing delivery infrastructure are currently under way.
* * * The dramatic changes in technology in recent years have made existing oil and natural gas reserves stretch further while keeping energy costs lower than they otherwise would have been.
Seismic imaging and advanced drilling techniques are facilitating the discovery of promising new reservoirs and are enabling the continued development of mature fields.
But because of inexorably rising demand, these improved technologies have been unable to prevent the underlying long-term prices of oil and natural gas in the United States from rising.
Conversion of the vast Athabasca oil sands reserves in Alberta to productive capacity has been slow.
But at current market prices they have become competitive.
Moreover, new technologies are facilitating U.S. production of so-called unconventional gas reserves, such as tight sands gas, shale gas, and coalbed methane.
Production from unconventional sources has more than doubled since 1990 and currently accounts for roughly one-third of U.S. dry gas production.
According to projections from the Energy Information Administration, most of the growth in the domestic supply of natural gas over the next twenty years will come from unconventional sources.
In many respects, the unconventional is increasingly becoming the conventional.
In the more distant future, perhaps a generation or more, lies the potential to develop productive capacity from natural gas hydrates.
Located in marine sediments and the Arctic, these ice-like structures store immense quantities of methane.
Although the size of these potential resources is not well measured, mean estimates from the U.S. Geological Survey indicate that the United States alone may possess 200 quadrillion cubic feet of natural gas in the form of hydrates.
To put this figure in perspective, the world's proved reserves of natural gas are on the order of 6 quadrillion cubic feet.
* * * In the decades ahead, natural gas and oil will compete in the United States with coal, nuclear power, and renewable sources of energy.
As the manner in which energy is produced and consumed evolves, it is not unreasonable to expect that, in the long run, the prices per unit of energy from various sources would tend to converge.
At present, long-term futures prices for natural gas are, on a Btu-equivalent basis, notably less expensive than those for crude oil.
Clearly, limited substitution possibilities across fuels have resulted in persistent cost differentials, but those very differentials inspire the technologies that, over time, reduce such limitations.
A clear example is gas-to-liquids (GTL) technology, which converts natural gas to high-quality naphtha and diesel fuel.
Given the large-scale production facilities that are currently being contemplated, GTL is poised to become an increasingly important component of the world's energy supply.
Current projections of production however remain modest.
GTL promises to add a good measure of flexibility in the way that natural gas resources are utilized.
In addition, given the concerns over the long-term adequacy of liquid production capacity from conventional oil reserves, gas to liquids may provide an attractive, competitively priced, option for making use of stranded gas, which, for lack of access to transportation infrastructure, cannot be brought to market.
* * * In summary, improving technology and ongoing shifts in the structure of economic activity are reducing the energy intensity of industrial countries, and presumably recent oil price increases will accelerate the pace of displacement of energy-intensive production facilities.
If history is any guide, oil will eventually be overtaken by less-costly alternatives well before conventional oil reserves run out.
Indeed, oil displaced coal despite still vast untapped reserves of coal, and coal displaced wood without denuding our forest lands.
Innovation is already altering the power source of motor vehicles, and much research is directed at reducing gasoline requirements.
Moreover, new technologies to preserve existing conventional oil reserves will emerge in the years ahead.
We will begin the transition to the next major sources of energy perhaps before midcentury as production from conventional oil reservoirs, according to central tendency scenarios of the Energy Information Administration, is projected to peak.
In fact, the development and application of new sources of energy, especially nonconventional oil, is already in train.
Nonetheless, the transition will take time.
We, and the rest of the world, doubtless will have to live with the geopolitical and other uncertainties of the oil markets for some time to come.
* * * We are unable to judge with certainty how technological possibilities will play out in the future, but we can say with some assurance that developments in energy markets will remain central in determining the longer-run health of our nation's economy.
The experience of the past fifty years--and indeed much longer than that--affirms that market forces play the key role in conserving scarce energy resources, directing those resources to their most highly valued uses.
The availability of adequate productive capacity, of course, will also be driven by nonmarket influences and by other policy considerations.
To be sure, energy issues present policymakers and citizens with difficult tradeoffs to consider and decisions to make outside the market process.
The concentration of oil reserves in politically volatile areas of the world is an ongoing concern.
But that concern and others, one hopes, will be addressed in a manner that, to the greatest extent possible, does not distort or stifle the meaningful functioning of our markets.

