I am particularly pleased to accept an invitation to address the National Association of Real Estate Editors.
Journalists are critical in helping the public understand the economics of the mortgage market, which has become more accessible, yet also more complex than ever.
Your ability to demystify the mortgage market and identify trends greatly improves the public's understanding of the housing market--the market for one of the most important financial transactions an individual will ever undertake.
I also note that your readership includes real estate professionals--another group of individuals who play a crucial role in the efficient operation of the housing market.
Homeowners often rely on recommendations from their realtors when looking for financing.
Realtors must understand the role they play in making credit markets work, and in promoting sustainable homeownership opportunities for individuals.
In our society, homeownership is the most common step one can take toward accumulating wealth.
Home equity, built over time, has also become an important source of cash for other investments, including educational expenses.
Moreover, homeownership strengthens communities by turning residents into investors with an ownership interest in the places they live.
Recently, homeownership rates have reached record levels, thanks, in large measure, to technological innovations that allow for risk-based pricing of loans, along with the rapid growth of the subprime mortgage market.
This brings me to the topic I want to discuss today: the recent release of pricing information collected under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA).
As you are aware, HMDA requires that large mortgage lenders report their lending activities to the Federal Reserve Board and its sister agencies.
The Board validates and ultimately compiles the data into a format that is made available to the public.
The public can then use this information to evaluate whether lenders are serving their communities, enforcing laws prohibiting discrimination in lending, and providing private investors with information to guide investments in housing.
Generally, for-profit lenders that have offices in metropolitan areas and that have more than $34 million in assets, or whose mortgage lending represents 10 percent of their lending originations, must report under HMDA.
In my remarks today, I will first review the history of HMDA as a backdrop for the new HMDA pricing data.
The Federal Reserve is still editing these data, but I will also provide a preview of what they are likely to show.
HMDA History in Brief The regulations implementing HMDA require that lenders disclose aspects of their home mortgage application and lending activities, including the applicant's or borrower's race, ethnicity, sex, and income.
Also reported are characteristics of the loan, such as the amount and purpose, and the location of the property securing the loan.
But it was not always this way.
When HMDA was originally enacted in the mid-1970s, the only information required to be reported was the number and dollar amount of loans, by census tract.
Congress, concerned about the role that financial institutions' lending policies might play in the deterioration of our cities, designed HMDA to combat the practice known as "redlining," in which institutions took deposits but did not lend in their local communities.
Initially, HMDA data simply helped the public and regulators track where an institution was lending and, more important, where it was not.
Not until the late 1980s did the data collection expand to include race, sex, and income levels for each loan application, along with whether the application was approved or denied.
By then, the issue was whether minority borrowers were denied mortgage loans more frequently than white borrowers and whether those disparities reflected discrimination in mortgage underwriting.
Today, after significant changes in the mortgage market brought on by technological advances, deregulation, and financial innovation, the credit availability question is no longer limited to whether minority borrowers have access to credit but, rather, at what price that credit is available.
Moreover, there are new questions about whether the price of credit always reflects the lender's risk or cost, or whether it is tied in any way to the race or sex of the borrower.
The technological changes have led to strong growth in the subprime mortgage market.
In general, this growth appears to be a positive development.
Homeownership is at record highs among low-income and minority borrowers, many of whom would not have qualified for mortgages several years ago, and most of whom have been able to make their mortgage payments.
At the same time, the increase in mortgage lending among lower-income and minority borrowers has been accompanied by reports of abusive, unethical, and, in some cases, illegal lending practices.
I am sure you are aware of the concern about whether consumers have the ability to shop for mortgages and to avoid unfair or deceptive lending arrangements.
Taking these concerns and public comments into consideration, the Federal Reserve determined that information on loan prices was critical to gaining insight into the functioning of the higher-cost mortgage market.
In the Board's amendments to the regulation that implements HMDA, Regulation C, we attempted to expand the HMDA data to permit evaluation of this market.
The same amendments also required recording of information about the lien status of the loan, whether it was for manufactured housing, and whether it was subject to the Home Ownership Equity Protection Act.
The new data were first reported for loans originated in 2004.
Although the edited aggregate HMDA data will not be available until September 2005, lenders, as of March 31, are required to make their individual data available to anyone who submits a request.
Some community organizations have already obtained and analyzed the data of some large lenders and have published reports indicating they believe that the data reveal discrimination in pricing.
Simultaneously, the Federal Reserve, together with the other agencies that make up the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council and the Department of Housing and Urban Development, has been explaining to financial institutions and to the public the uses and limitations of the pricing data and how these data will be used by bank examiners.
General Data Issues The collection of HMDA data is premised on two distinct assumptions.
The first is that the mortgage markets work more efficiently when information is publicly available.
HMDA data have been used to identify credit demand that might otherwise have been overlooked.
The analysis and conclusions drawn from the data have also encouraged the establishment of partnerships between lenders and community organizations to meet credit needs.
The other assumption is that data improve compliance with, and enforcement of, fair lending and consumer protection laws.
The HMDA data are the first point of reference for fair lending examinations conducted by the Federal Reserve and the other banking regulators.
Government agencies use HMDA data to assist in evaluating lender compliance with anti-discrimination laws--particularly the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Housing Act (FHA)--as well as other consumer protection laws.
The data help examiners identify institutions, loan products, or geographic markets that show disparities in the disposition of loan applications by race, ethnicity, or other characteristics that require investigation under the fair lending laws.
With the addition of price data for higher-priced loans, the agencies will be able to more easily identify price disparities that require investigation.
If disparities are found to violate the ECOA or FHA, certain federal agencies are authorized to compel lenders to cease discriminatory practices and, among other remedies, obtain monetary relief for victims.
The public disclosure of price information under HMDA--in the form of spreads between the annual percentage rate (APR) on a loan and the rate on Treasury securities of comparable maturity--is designed to ensure that the data continue to be useful in improving market efficiency and legal compliance.
The APR represents the cost of credit to the consumer and captures the contract-based interest rate on a loan as well as the points and fees that consumers pay up front, converted to a percentage rate.
But since these fees have to be amortized over the term of the loan to calculate the APR, and since interest rates vary over time, even the APR can be difficult to use as a basis of comparison across loans.
Because of interest-rate fluctuations, the HMDA rules require lenders to report the difference between the APR and the rate on Treasury securities of comparable maturity for any loans with rate spreads that exceed prescribed thresholds.
For first-and second-lien loans, the thresholds are 3 percentage points and 5 percentage points above the Treasury security of comparable maturity, respectively.
These particular thresholds were chosen to exclude the reporting of the vast majority of prime-rate loans and include the vast majority of the subprime-rate loans, minimizing the burden of the data collection on lenders while providing information on that portion of the market where concern about consumer abuse is most prevalent.
Although the addition of the price data significantly increases the robustness of HMDA data, the data alone do not prove discrimination.
Instead, the data will be used as a screen to identify any aspects of the higher-priced end of the mortgage market that warrant closer scrutiny.
The new HMDA data are clearly limited: they do not include credit scores, loan-to-value ratio, or consumer debt-to-income ratio--all factors relevant to the cost of credit.
Because these important determinants of price are missing, one cannot draw definitive conclusions about whether particular lenders discriminate unlawfully or take unfair advantage of consumers based solely on a review of the HMDA data.
The new data will be useful to examiners in identifying particular loan products or geographic areas with significant pricing disparities and establishing one or more focal points for a pricing analysis that would include a review of all the factors relevant to a particular institution's pricing decisions.
The Board did consider adding other data elements relevant to pricing to the HMDA collection.
For each possible new data item, we weighed the potential benefits and costs.
On the basis of that analysis and careful consideration of public comments, we decided not to add more factors.
In addition to the cost to lenders of collecting additional data, more data being made publicly available would create very real privacy concerns.
As it stands, many of the HMDA data fields are unique and can be matched with other information to determine the identity of individual borrowers.
Given the costs and limitations of collecting additional data, we felt that the potential for further privacy losses outweighed the usefulness of the additional data.
It is always possible that banks could disclose additional information on their own, but even this is questionable from a legal standpoint.
The recent Fair Credit Reporting Act limits financial institutions' ability to share consumer reports (such as credit scores) with third parties.
Regardless, the new data still offer the public and supervisory agencies charged with enforcement of the fair lending laws a better screening tool than was previously available.
Until now, in determining whether a lender is discriminating in its pricing decisions, examiners have relied on several factors: the relationship between loan pricing and compensation of loan officers or brokers; lender policies giving loan officers broad pricing discretion; the use of empirically based and statistically sound risk-based pricing systems; disparities among prices quoted or charged to applicants who differ in their protected characteristics (such as race); and consumer complaints alleging price discrimination.
These data will still be used, but the APRs will make the high-cost loan assessments much more precise.
Although discussions of the new HMDA pricing data have just begun, some outcomes should be anticipated.
First, a debate will continue about what the HMDA data say about the lending practices of individual institutions.
Some community groups have already publicized their analysis of the data provided by individual institutions, and those institutions have responded.
The attorney general for New York is also reviewing the data of several institutions.
I anticipate that these inquiries and the conclusions drawn from them will continue for several months.
Second, lenders can gain an increased awareness of the lending and pricing practices of their organizations, and of their competitors, through analysis of HMDA data.
As a result, lenders may take opportunities to compete in areas where the data show concentrations of high-priced lending.
Competitive pressures in such markets should increase efficiency in pricing, ensuring that prices for mortgages are commensurate with risk and do not just reflect an absence of competition.
Third, new and strengthened collaborations should emerge among lenders, community groups, realtors, and other participants in the real estate market.
As lenders seek to enter new markets, or to better serve their existing markets, the groups that have an intimate knowledge of their communities will be viewed as valuable partners.
Finally, increased importance will be placed on the value of financial education to help consumers shop for and obtain the mortgage loan that represents the best price and terms for their financial situation and needs.
The broad array of mortgage loan products makes choosing difficult, even for those with financial savvy.
The choices are substantially more confusing for those with credit-impaired histories or those who are unfamiliar with the different types of financial service providers and products.
Consumers are often bewildered by the mortgage credit process, and the consequences of poor choices or misunderstanding or misinformation can have lasting effects on their financial well-being.
An Early Look at the Data As I said earlier, as of March 31, lenders have been required to make their individual HMDA data available.
Many press reports have discussed these data and there is already a vigorous debate about what the data do, and will, show.
The Federal Reserve is now editing the data, and its reports will not be complete until September.
Until then, we can only provide a broad preview of the overall picture.
In 2004, some 8,800 lenders reported 37 million loan applications, compared with 8,100 lenders with 42 million loan applications in 2003.
The drop in the number of loan applications reflects the slowing of the refinance market last year.
The increase in the number of lenders is partly the result of the expanded coverage of the Board's amendments, but it could also suggest increasing competition in the home mortgage industry.
Regarding subprime lending, back in 1994 the subprime market, defined as high-cost mortgage loans, amounted to $35 billion, or 5 percent of total mortgage originations.
By 2004, the subprime market had exploded to $530 billion, or 19 percent of total mortgage originations.
The annual subprime market growth rate over this time was a whopping 27 percent.
The initial data also suggest that prevalence of higher-priced loans differs notably across racial and ethnic groups.
As some press accounts have implied, the data indicate that blacks and Hispanics are more likely to take out higher-priced loans than non-Hispanic whites, and that Asians are the least likely to have higher-priced loans.
These preliminary data also seem to indicate that the actual prices paid by those taking out higher-priced loans are about the same for different racial groups.
Until the editing process is complete, more details cannot be provided.
Needless to say, everyone will have an opportunity to review the final data when they are released in September.
Conclusion In closing, I cannot emphasize enough the importance of your role.
By understanding the potential usefulness and limitations of the data, and conveying those messages clearly, we can promote a more efficient market and compliance with anti-discrimination laws without unfairly tarnishing the reputations of particular lenders.
No one will be served if lenders are unwilling to enter, or remain in, certain higher-priced segments of the market.

The dual banking system is critical to the remarkable diversity and flexibility of our financial system.
This system encourages innovation and responsiveness, while serving as a bulwark against regulatory excesses.
It supports a dynamic and competitive financial services market that yields tangible benefits for consumers, businesses, and the economy as a whole.
The dual banking system could not function without close cooperation and understanding between federal and state supervisors.
As you know, the Federal Reserve has consistently been a strong supporter of the dual banking system, and I have every reason to believe that support will continue.
We understand, as you do, the importance of a safe and sound banking system to the proper functioning of the economy.
We also understand the role of effective supervision in ensuring that our banks are sound.
At the conclusion of your three days here, let me offer some perspectives on the financial performance of the banking industry and share my thoughts on what that performance might imply for supervisors.
Performance of the Banking Industry The banking industry began this year with a lot of momentum: In 2004, bank profits exceeded $100 billion for the second consecutive year and indeed the second time ever.
The industry delivered this excellent performance as it adapted to rising interest rates and more-rapid economic growth, including a gradual improvement in business loan demand.
First-quarter earnings announcements by the major banks were generally quite positive, highlighting further acceleration in loan growth, continuing improvement in credit quality, and robust trading revenues.
Call Report information tells the same story.
Insured commercial banks reported record earnings of $29 billion in the first quarter, an increase of 10.7 percent from the fourth quarter of 2004.
These earnings represent an attractive return on assets of 1.38 percent.
Overall return on common equity came in at 13.76 percent, damped a little by the significant increases in reported shareholders' equity associated with last year's banking mergers.
Loan growth was solid at about 2 percent, including a pickup in the growth of commercial and industrial (C&I), construction, and mortgage loans.
Bankers have been pleased to report that C&I loans have shown greater strength, consistent with loan officer surveys and market reports that indicate loan demand has returned.
That said, the rate of increase in loans was much lower at community banks than for the industry as a whole.
Increases in home equity lines of credit remained rapid at nearly 4 percent but were below the remarkable 10 percent increases seen in the second and third quarters of last year.
We understand that much of the construction lending has been for residential construction, consistent with the very strong housing market.
Banks were not able to fully enjoy the benefits of growth in loans and securities, however, because banks' net interest margins narrowed further to 3.61 percent.
Rising short-term interest rates, a flattening yield curve, competitive pressure on spreads, and rapid growth in assets funded with purchased money each played a role in the margin compression.
The net result was that, despite solid asset growth, the industry's net interest income barely rose in the first quarter.
This narrowing trend in margins bears watching, including the extent to which competitive pressures are playing a significant role.
Banks have been managing their core deposits carefully as one means to limit the narrowing of their margins.
As market interest rates fell in 2000 and 2001, banks reduced the rates on their nonmaturity deposits more slowly than rates on comparable nondeposit instruments had declined.
This strategy helped banks to retain their deposit customers and attract new balances; money market and savings accounts now fund 30.8 percent of bank assets.
In addition, this approach allowed banks to reclaim some of the market share they had lost to nondeposit products.
As short-term interest rates have risen, banks have repriced these deposits more slowly.
Steady improvement in already-strong asset quality has supported earnings growth by allowing for lower provisions.
Many in the industry still expect provisioning to increase over the course of 2005, although that did not happen in the first quarter.
At this point, it appears that such increases will primarily reflect growth in loan portfolios because asset quality has not yet shown signs of impending deterioration.
For example, by the end of the first quarter, problem assets had fallen to 0.59 percent of loans, down considerably from 1.27 percent in September 2002, the peak level for this credit cycle.
Improvement in economic conditions is a key reason for this sustained decline in problem assets, along with the liquidity and depth of secondary markets for troubled loans and, we believe, better risk management.
Fees in some market-sensitive businesses, especially trading, showed renewed strength in the first quarter.
Service charges on deposits weakened as a result of fewer retail overdrafts and the indirect effects of increases in compensating balances--as higher market interest rates boosted internal earnings credit rates on such balances--that damped direct-fee revenue received from commercial depositors.
Mortgage banking revenues from servicing activities have been robust, although those from originations are tailing off.
Despite frequent reports from bankers that their compliance costs have increased significantly and that they have incurred some significant nonrecurring charges, expense control in the industry has been good.
At this point, the available indicators suggest that banks' earnings prospects remain favorable.
Nevertheless, bankers would probably admit they would like to see a greater share of their earnings growth come from improved lending and margins rather than lower provisions.
Bank capital ratios remain very strong.
Some 99 percent of banks in the United States are well capitalized, matching the highest proportion we have ever seen.
Regulatory capital ratios are not affected by merger-related increases in nominal capital, of course, because intangible goodwill assets are deducted from regulatory capital.
Community Banks The aggregate performance measures I have just described are quite significantly influenced by the largest banks.
However, most commercial banks are community banks--banks with assets of less than $1 billion.
In 2004, community banks once again demonstrated their value to their shareholders and the marketplace, earning $13.4 billion for a respectable return on assets (ROA) of 1.21 percent and a return on shareholders' equity of 11.72 percent.
Community banks also reported strong results in the first quarter of 2005.
Profits of $3.6 billion reflected mixed developments in key businesses, a significant and favorable seasonal influence, and many of the same factors that affected the industry as a whole.
Compared with the prior year, community bank profitability improved somewhat with a ROA of 1.27 percent, up 5 basis points from the same quarter of 2004, and a return on equity (ROE) of 12.33 percent, an improvement of about 50 basis points.
On this year-over-year basis, improved asset quality allowed for lower provisions, but margins were tighter.
Only about 5 percent of community banks lost money for the year--and those institutions represented only about 2 percent of total community bank assets.
Community bank loans grew less than 1 percent in the first quarter compared with the fourth quarter of 2004, a rate that was about half the pace for the industry as a whole.
Increases in C&I and one- to four-family mortgage loans were more subdued for community banks than they were for other banks.
Commercial real estate loans continued to grow smartly, however, and I'll have a bit more to say about that in a minute.
Consolidation is continuing among community banks, and the data tell the story.
There were 7,146 community banks at the end of March 2005, about 140 fewer (2 percent) than a year earlier and about 770 fewer (9.7 percent) than at year-end 2000.
Consolidation can also be seen at bank holding companies (BHCs), which own 97 percent of commercial banking assets.
The number of BHCs has fallen slightly--about 4 percent--over the past decade, but this figure has increased a bit in three of the past four years.
The number of multibank BHCs has decreased about one-third over the past decade, reflecting the tendency of banks to consolidate subsidiary charters in this era of nationwide banking.
Although bank consolidation largely reflects the search for efficiency and scope, it does not signal a threat to the banking charter or the community banking franchise.
Consolidation and the growth of large banking organizations do not alter the fundamental competitive advantages that banks enjoy, namely, deposit insurance, reputation and public confidence, branch networks and other delivery systems, and technology.
The market for new bank charters makes this point clear.
Some 124 new commercial bank charters were issued in 2004, and another 32 in the first quarter of 2005.
Counting these charters, 718 charters have been issued since the beginning of 2000.
Over that same period, for every three banks that disappeared through consolidation, another two new charters were granted.
In total, the new charters represent about $5.4 billion in new equity capital invested in community bank charters.
Issues That Bear Watching As in the past, the continued vitality of the banking charter calls for strong and prudent management, something that can be a challenge in this dynamic environment.
A key issue for management's attention at this time is the sustained rapid growth in commercial real estate lending--that is, construction loans as well as loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential and multifamily properties.
Let me take a moment to put that growth in perspective.
At community banks, growth in commercial real estate lending (CRE)--nearly $32 billion in 2004 alone--has accounted for at least two-thirds of total asset growth every year since 2001; CRE lending accounted essentially for all of the asset growth at these institutions in 2003 and 2004.
By March of this year, CRE lending had reached 28 percent of aggregate community bank assets, a new record for community banks that exceeded the previous record set in the early 1990s.
The bulk of CRE lending is in the form of commercial mortgages, which themselves have risen by an average of 10 percent annually since 1998.
However, construction lending has also been assuming a larger share of the pie.
Among community banks, construction loans increased at a compounded growth rate of 17.4 percent annually over the same period.
This is a remarkable pace of growth--and a growing concentration for community banks.
CRE lending is a traditional and natural part of the community banking franchise.
Underwriting practices continue to be much better than they were in the troubled days of the 1980s.
There is no indication at this time that the overall credit quality of CRE exposures at community banks has deteriorated, although there are signs that some underwriting standards have been under assault from competitive pressures.
Nonetheless, credit risk concentrations are a critical "franchise" risk for bankers, especially community bankers, and they can assume even greater importance when they involve high-growth lines of business.
Successful identification and management of these concentrations requires adherence to good credit fundamentals.
Strong capital ratios--ratios that are well in excess of regulatory minimums--have been a key factor in managing credit concentrations and a striking attribute of the most profitable community banks.
More generally, the competitive drive to win borrowers should not be allowed to overcome the disciplines of prudent lending practice.
As economic conditions and business loan demand have improved, we have expected and seen some degree of easing in commercial lending standards.
Competitive pressures and the natural desire to generate loan volume, however, can provide ample temptation to make lending decisions that bankers and their supervisors will live to regret.
In a similar vein, supervisors have been attentive to indications that home equity lending standards and risk-management practices may not have kept up with the very rapid growth in this form of lending.
Last month, the federal banking agencies issued guidance to the industry that was aimed at reinforcing sound practices for lending and credit risk management.
I encourage bankers to review that guidance and consider its recommendations carefully.
Let me conclude with a few thoughts on managing interest rate risk.
In the low-rate period that ended last summer, bankers faced a natural temptation to extend maturities in search of more-attractive rates of return.
From 2000 to early 2004, the share of community bank assets maturing beyond five years had grown steadily from 16.9 percent to 18.4 percent, respectively.
Since then, the share of these assets has been pared back to 16.3 percent, as short-term interest rates have increased.
Bankers continue to rely significantly on the interest rate protection provided by their stable and reliable core deposit base.
If recent deposit growth has been fueled by low interest rates and weakness in the equity markets, unexpected liquidity and interest rate pressures may develop if deposit customers shift funds to other investment vehicles.
We need to remember that depositor behavior can change, as it did in the high-interest-rate environment of the late 1970s and early 1980s.
Conclusions The U.S. banking industry is healthy, strong, profitable, and well positioned to support economic growth and prosperity.
Banks have been able to adapt to changing circumstances and still generate record profits.
The outlook for performance in the coming year is good.
Community banks continue to demonstrate their value to the marketplace and to occupy a prominent position in the economy.
New challenges, and perhaps some new opportunities, will arise as we move ahead.

