I have long since been awarded the status of honorary Italian, for which I am sincerely appreciative.
In my more than eighteen years at the Federal Reserve, much has surprised me, but nothing more than the remarkable ability of our economy to absorb and recover from the shocks of stock market crashes, credit crunches, terrorism, and hurricanes--blows that would have almost certainly precipitated deep recessions in decades past.
This resilience, not evident except in retrospect, owes to a remarkable increase in economic flexibility, partly the consequence of deliberate economic policy and partly the consequence of innovations in information technology.
A couple of weeks ago, I outlined to a convention of fellow economists how I believe this all came about.
I should like to share some of those views with you this morning.
For this country's first century and a half, government was only peripherally engaged in what we currently term the management of aggregate demand.
Any endeavor to alter the path of private economic activity through active intervention would have been deemed inappropriate and, more important, unnecessary.
In one of the more notable coincidences of history, our Declaration of Independence was signed the same year in which Adam Smith published his Wealth of Nations.
Smith's prescription of letting markets prevail with minimal governmental interference became the guiding philosophy of American leadership for much of our history.
With a masterful insight into the workings of the free-market institutions that were then emerging, Smith postulated an "invisible hand" in which competitive behavior drove an economy's resources toward their fullest and most efficient use.
Economic growth and prosperity, he argued, would emerge if governments stood aside and allowed markets to work.
Indeed, within a very few decades, free-market capitalism became the prevailing stance of most governments' economic policy, even if it was often implemented imperfectly.
This framework withstood the conceptual onslaughts of Robert Owen's utopians, Karl Marx's communists and later, the Fabian socialists.
The free-market paradigm came under more-vigorous attack after the collapse of the world's major economies in the 1930s.
As the global depression deepened, the seeming failure of competitive markets to restore full employment perplexed economists until John Maynard Keynes offered an explanation that was to influence policy practitioners for generations to come.
He argued that, contrary to the tenets of Smith and his followers, market systems did not always converge to full employment.
They often appeared to settle at an equilibrium in which significant segments of the workforce were unable to find jobs.
In the place of Smith's laissez-faire approach arose the view that government action was required to restore full employment and to rectify what were seen as other deficiencies of market-driven outcomes.
A tidal wave of regulation soon swept over much of the American business community.
Labor relations, securities markets, banking, agricultural pricing, and many other segments of the U.S. economy became subject to the oversight of government.
The apparent success of the economy during World War II, which operated at full employment in contrast to the earlier frightening developments during the Depression years, led to a considerable reluctance to fully dismantle wartime regulations when the hostilities came to an end.
However, cracks in the facade of government economic management appeared early in the post-World War II years, and those cracks continued to widen as time passed.
At the macro level, the system of wage and price controls imposed in the 1970s to deal with the problem of inflation proved unworkable and ineffective.
And at the micro level, heavy regulation of many industries was increasingly seen as impeding efficiency and competitiveness.
By the early 1980s, the long-prevalent notion that the centrally planned economy of the Soviet Union was catching up with the West had begun to be discredited, though it was not fully discarded until the collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1989 exposed the economic ruin behind the Iron Curtain.
Starting in the 1970s, U.S. Presidents, supported by bipartisan majorities in the Congress, responded to the growing recognition of the distortions created by regulation, by deregulating large segments of the transportation, communications, energy, and financial services industries.
The stated purpose of this deregulation was to enhance competition, which had come to be seen as a significant spur to productivity growth and elevated standards of living.
Assisting in the dismantling of economic restraints was the persistent, albeit slow, lowering of barriers to cross-border trade and finance.
As a consequence, the United States, then widely seen as a once-great economic power that had lost its way, gradually moved back to the forefront of what Joseph Schumpeter, the renowned Harvard professor, had called "creative destruction"--the continual scrapping of old technologies to make way for the innovative.
In that paradigm, standards of living rise because depreciation and other cash flows of industries employing older, increasingly obsolescent technologies are marshaled, along with new savings, to finance the production of capital assets that almost always embody cutting-edge technologies.
Workers, of necessity, migrate with the capital.
Through this process, wealth is created, incremental step by incremental step, as high levels of productivity associated with innovative technologies displace less-efficient productive capacity.
The model presupposes the continuous churning of a flexible competitive economy in which the new displaces the old.
As the 1980s progressed, the success of that strategy confirmed the earlier views that a loosening of regulatory restraint on business would improve the flexibility of our economy.
No specific program encompassed and coordinated initiatives to enhance flexibility, but there was a growing recognition that a market economy could best withstand and recover from shocks when provided maximum flexibility.
Beyond deregulation, innovative technologies, especially information technologies, have contributed critically to enhanced flexibility.
A quarter-century ago, for example, companies often required weeks to discover the emergence of inventory imbalances, allowing production to continue to exacerbate the excess.
Excessive stockbuilding, in turn, necessitated a deeper decline in output than would have been necessary had the knowledge of the status of inventories been fully current.
The advent of innovative information technologies significantly shortened the reporting lag, enabling flexible real-time responses to emerging imbalances.
Deregulation and the newer information technologies have joined, in the United States and elsewhere, to advance flexibility in the financial sector.
Financial stability may turn out to have been the most important contributor to the evident significant gains in economic stability over the past two decades.
Historically, banks have been at the forefront of financial intermediation, in part because their ability to leverage offers an efficient source of funding.
But in periods of severe financial stress, such leverage too often brought down banking institutions and, in some cases, precipitated financial crises that led to recession or worse.
But recent regulatory reform, coupled with innovative technologies, has stimulated the development of financial products, such as asset-backed securities, collateral loan obligations, and credit default swaps, that facilitate the dispersion of risk.
Conceptual advances in pricing options and other complex financial products, along with improvements in computer and telecommunications technologies, have significantly lowered the costs of, and expanded the opportunities for, hedging risks that were not readily deflected in earlier decades.
The new instruments of risk dispersal have enabled the largest and most sophisticated banks, in their credit-granting role, to divest themselves of much credit risk by passing it to institutions with far less leverage.
Insurance companies, especially those in reinsurance, pension funds, and hedge funds continue to be willing, at a price, to supply credit protection.
These increasingly complex financial instruments have contributed to the development of a far more flexible, efficient, and hence resilient financial system than the one that existed just a quarter-century ago.
After the bursting of the stock market bubble in 2000, unlike previous periods following large financial shocks, no major financial institution defaulted, and the economy held up far better than many had anticipated.
If we have attained a degree of flexibility that can mitigate most significant shocks--a proposition as yet not fully tested--the performance of the economy will be improved and the job of macroeconomic policymakers will be made much simpler.
Governments today, although still far more activist than in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, are rediscovering the benefits of competition and the resilience to economic shocks that it fosters.
We are also beginning to recognize an international version of Smith's invisible hand in the globalization of economic forces.
Whether by intention or by happenstance, many, if not most, governments in recent decades have been relying more and more on the forces of the marketplace and reducing their intervention in market outcomes.
We appear to be revisiting Adam Smith's notion that the more flexible an economy, the greater its ability to self-correct after inevitable, often unanticipated disturbances.
That greater tendency toward self-correction has made the cyclical stability of the economy less dependent on the actions of macroeconomic policymakers, whose responses often have come too late or have been misguided.
It is important to remember that most adjustment of a market imbalance is well under way before the imbalance becomes widely identified as a problem.
Individual prices, exchange rates, and interest rates, adjust incrementally in real time to restore balance.
In contrast, administrative or policy actions that await clear evidence of imbalance are of necessity late.
Being able to rely on markets to do the heavy lifting of adjustment is an exceptionally valuable policy asset.
The impressive performance of the U.S. economy over the past couple of decades, despite shocks that in the past would have surely produced marked economic contraction, offers the clearest evidence of the benefits of increased market flexibility.
We weathered a decline on October 19, 1987, of a fifth of the market value of U.S. equities with little evidence of subsequent macroeconomic stress--an episode that hinted at a change in adjustment dynamics.
The credit crunch of the early 1990s and the bursting of the stock market bubble in 2000 were absorbed with the shallowest recessions in the post-World War II period.
And the economic fallout from the tragic events of September 11, 2001, was moderated by market forces, with severe economic weakness evident for only a few weeks.
Most recently, the flexibility of our market-driven economy has allowed us, thus far, to weather reasonably well the steep rise in spot and futures prices for oil and natural gas that we have experienced over the past two years.
The consequence has been a far more stable economy.
* * * Flexibility is most readily achieved by fostering an environment of maximum competition.
A key element in creating this environment is flexible labor markets.
Many working people, regrettably, equate labor market flexibility with job insecurity.
Despite that perception, flexible labor policies appear to promote job creation, not destroy it.
An increased capacity of management to discharge workers without excessive cost, for example, apparently increases companies' willingness to hire without fear of unremediable mistakes.
The net effect, to the surprise of most, has been what appears to be a decline in the structural unemployment rate in the United States.
Protectionism in all its guises, both domestic and international, does not contribute to the welfare of American workers.
At best, it is a short-term fix at a cost of lower standards of living for the nation as a whole.
We need increased education and training for those displaced by creative destruction, not a stifling of competition.
A consequence of our highly competitive, rapidly growing economy is that the average American will hold many different jobs in a lifetime.
Accordingly, education is no longer the sole province of the young.
Significant numbers of workers continue their education well beyond their twenties.
Millions enroll in community colleges in later life, for example, to upgrade their skills or get new ones.
It is a measure of the dynamism of the U.S. economy that community colleges are one of the fastest growing segments of our educational system.
* * * Moving forward, I trust that we have learned durable lessons about the benefits of fostering and preserving a flexible economy.
That flexibility has been the product of the economic dynamism of our workers and firms that was unleashed, in part, by the efforts of policymakers to remove rigidities and promote competition.
Although the business cycle has not disappeared, flexibility has made the economy more resilient to shocks and more stable overall during the past couple of decades.

I would like to thank the National Bankers Association for inviting me to participate in the annual convention today.
I know that regulatory issues are always a critical concern for your members.
Today, I would like to focus on three regulatory issues that are currently high on the list of both bankers and supervisors: credit risk, particularly in residential and commercial real estate; the proposed revisions to the current minimum regulatory capital requirements; and the new disclosures under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA).
Credit Risk First, I would like to talk about credit risk, which has been the leading cause of bank failures over the years and remains the biggest risk for most financial institutions.
While credit performance has been very strong lately, and banks of all sizes survived the 2001 recession with only a slight decline in credit quality, banking supervisors have become concerned recently about apparent increased risk-taking in both commercial and residential real estate lending.
Of course, when property values rise and the loan business grows increasingly competitive, bank supervisors tend to worry that more-aggressive underwriting may set the stage for future deterioration in credit quality.
The federal agencies issued joint guidance on home equity lines of credit, or HELOCs, in May; we are now working on additional guidance on affordability products in the residential mortgage market and on underwriting practices in the commercial real estate market.
Residential real estate lending has been a significant focus of supervisory attention this year.
Average U.S. housing prices have appreciated more than 80 percent since 1997, and were up 13.4 percent in the second quarter--the largest year-to-year increase in more than a quarter century.
Home prices react fundamentally to factors affecting affordability, such as household income growth and mortgage interest rates.
But another factor apparently fueling price appreciation has been an increase in speculative buying; in other words, more property purchases have been made by investors for profit and not for use as their residence.
As home prices have risen, lenders have turned to a variety of ways to help their customers buy the homes they want.
These include non-traditional, or "affordability," mortgage products.
We've also seen the increased use of HELOCs as part of purchase financing, supplementing the first lien.
At the end of 2004, outstanding drawn HELOCs at all insured commercial banks totaled $398 billion, a 40 percent increase over 2003.
Meanwhile, the federal banking agencies have observed some easing of underwriting standards, with lenders competing to attract home equity lending business.
Lenders are sometimes offering interest-only loans, high loan-to-value ratios, and limited requirements for documentation of a borrower's assets and income.
Given this easing of standards, there is some concern that banks' home equity loan portfolios may be vulnerable to a rise in interest rates and, in some markets, a decline in home values.
In May, the federal banking agencies issued guidance describing the sound risk management practices that institutions should follow to keep pace with the risks of a growing home equity portfolio.
For instance, underwriting standards for interest-only and variable rate HELOCs should include an assessment of the borrower's ability to absorb potential increases in interest rates.
Non-traditional, or "affordability," mortgage products are designed to minimize down-payments, initial monthly payments, or both.
These include option adjustable-rate mortgages, or option ARMs, which allow borrowers to choose among four payment options; interest-only mortgages, which defer principal repayments for up to ten years; and simultaneous second mortgages, which allow buyers to finance up to 100 percent of the value of their homes.
Affordability products are growing rapidly but still represent only a small share of outstanding mortgages.
From the point of view of bank supervisors, affordability products do not necessarily pose solvency concerns.
Despite the apparent decline in underwriting standards, less than 5 percent of outstanding mortgages have a loan-to-value ratio greater than 90 percent, which means that the vast majority of homeowners have a significant equity cushion; in the event prices fall, only a very small percentage of owners are likely to see their debts exceed the value of their homes.
Moreover, depository institutions are generally well-capitalized and well-diversified, which means that prices could fall significantly without leading to a significant number of bank failures.
Still, affordability products pose special risks--for instance, there is a greater likelihood that borrowers will experience negative amortization, that is, since the monthly payments do not cover current accruing interest, their mortgage balances will increase over time.
Since borrowers with traditional mortgages expect the amortization of their loans will decrease their balances and build equity in their homes, we would expect lenders to clearly communicate to borrowers that this may not happen with non-traditional products.
When affordability products are offered along with easing of traditional credit underwriting practices, such as income verification and sound property appraisals, these products may pose potentially higher risks of default than traditional mortgages.
In August, Standard & Poor's revised its ratings criteria for option-ARM securitizations, increasing the amount of credit enhancement required.
The bank regulators are conducting a survey of industry practices with respect to affordability products and are considering guidance on the subject in the near future.
We hope to find out whether financial institutions are fully assessing and managing the new risks posed by affordability products.
Bank supervisors today also have concerns about commercial real estate, defined as those real estate loans where the primary source of repayment is derived from the rental income or sale proceeds of commercial property.
This has historically been a highly volatile asset class, and it played a central role in the banking problems of the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Federal Reserve staff is currently considering supervisory guidance on sound risk management practices for commercial real estate exposures, with the goal of issuing the guidance on an interagency basis.
Banking supervisors are carefully monitoring rising commercial real estate concentrations at some banking organizations.
At banks with high concentrations, bank supervisors expect risk-management practices, underwriting standards, and capital levels to keep pace with loan growth.
During previous downturns in the credit cycle, banks with high commercial real estate concentrations have suffered significant losses.
Smaller banks as a group have shown the strongest appetite for commercial real estate loans, and some believe that commercial real estate lending remains an area in which small banks can particularly effectively compete with larger banks.
So far, underwriting standards are high by historic standards, and much higher than in the period preceding the earlier crises.
Still, standards may be under some downward pressure as a result of strong competition and tight spreads.
Regulatory Capital Developments I would now like to discuss a few recent developments pertaining to regulatory capital.
As most of you probably know, in the past two weeks there has been activity in U.S. implementation of the Basel II capital framework, as well as in the development of revisions to current U.S. Basel I-based capital rules.
Last week, the four federal bank regulatory agencies--the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision--decided to publish an interagency advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) for revisions to the existing risk-based capital rules.
All four agencies are looking forward to comments from the industry and others on the proposal.
I would like to touch on a few key points.
First, our current risk-based capital rules, issued in 1989, have served us reasonably well over the years, but of course require ongoing "maintenance" from time to time.
Some proposals in the Basel I ANPR address areas that have been overdue for review, such as capturing short-term commitments; other portions of the ANPR are directed specifically at possible competitive implications of Basel II implementation in the United States, such as altering the risk-weights for mortgage exposures.
The rules under discussion in the ANPR, which would still apply to the vast majority of institutions in the United States, would be made more effective and more reflective of risk-taking, while still remaining relatively simple.
In contrast, the more complex Basel II rules, we propose, would be required only for a small set of large, complex organizations--although any institution that can qualify would be free to opt-in to the Basel II rules.
I would also like to emphasize that the Basel I proposal released last week is an advance notice, meaning the agencies are signaling their intent and direction on proposals, but are also intentionally leaving a number of areas open in order to solicit a broad range of comments.
And I should make it clear that the ANPR does not propose changes to the existing U.S. prompt corrective action or leverage requirements, nor does it suggest a new risk-based charge for operational risk.
Major areas covered in the ANPR include proposals to: increase the number of risk weight categories; permit greater use of external ratings as an indicator of credit risk for externally rated exposures; expand the types of guarantees and collateral that may be taken into account when assigning exposures to risk weight categories; and modify the risk weights associated with residential mortgages.
The ANPR also sets forth proposals to modify the credit conversion factors for certain types of commitments and to assign a risk-based capital charge to certain securitizations with early-amortization provisions.
It also seeks comment on assigning a higher risk weight to loans that are ninety days or more past due or in nonaccrual status and to certain commercial real estate exposures with highly volatile characteristics.
Finally, the ANPR also indicates that the agencies are considering modifying the risk weights on other retail and commercial exposures based on credit scores or some other factors.
Bankers--particularly at small-to-medium-sized institutions--have expressed concerns about our work on regulatory capital rules because of the potential competitive implications of implementing Basel II rules.
In drafting the ANPR, the agencies have tried to take those concerns into account.
At the Federal Reserve, we are particularly interested in effects that Basel II could have on banking markets.
In that vein, we have published several white papers analyzing the potential impact on specific aspects of banking, such as small-business lending, mortgage lending, and mergers and acquisitions; a paper on credit cards should be available before the end of the year.
While the conclusions of the papers published so far do not point to broad disruptions in existing banking markets as a result of Basel II, we do acknowledge that certain participants could be affected, especially in commercial and residential credit markets.
As we move forward with revisions to our Basel I-based rules, we continue to be quite interested in the comments of bankers and others about the potential implications of these proposals.
Your input is vital to making the final product the right one.
As supervisors, our focus will continue to be on ensuring that risk-management processes are appropriate for operations of each institution and that those risk systems operate effectively.
Thus, we expect that non-Basel II banks can continue to have CAMELS 1 and 2 ratings as long as they operate in a safe and sound manner.
The ANPR represents our attempt to reduce some of the differences between Basel I and Basel II, while acknowledging that simpler rules are still appropriate for nearly all members of the banking industry.
To be quite clear, from the Federal Reserve's perspective, institutions should not be looked upon as having deficient risk-management systems simply because they choose to stay under the Basel I capital framework.
In considering changes to Basel I, a challenge we face is how to make the capital requirements more risk sensitive and responsive to potential competitive concerns, while not adding unnecessary regulatory burden.
To make capital more risk sensitive requires regulators and bankers to employ clearer measures of risk taking.
If these measures are used by bankers in their internal credit-decision process and are readily available for reporting purposes, then the regulatory burden will be smaller.
However, some of the proposed amendments may require significant changes to internal information systems.
We hope that bankers and others will give us specific comments on this tradeoff between risk sensitivity and competitive concerns, on the one hand, with the additional reporting burden on the other, so that we can develop a proposal for capital that is workable for the large number of banks that will continue to use Basel I as amended.
In addition to the Basel I ANPR, the U.S. banking agencies issued within the past two weeks a statement about the plans for Basel II implementation in the United States.
The agencies had previously indicated a delay in the Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking based on the results from a recent quantitative impact study (QIS4), which showed a wider dispersion and larger overall drop in regulatory capital requirements for the QIS4 population of banks than the agencies had expected.
I am very pleased that the agencies, based on additional analysis of QIS4 data over the summer, were able to come to an agreement on a way forward, described in the recent interagency statement.
In our statement, we made every effort to provide as much information as possible to institutions interested in Basel II, and also, I hope, showed how seriously we are taking Basel II implementation and paying attention to its possible consequences.
In particular, the agencies underscored the prudence we are using in moving to Basel II by revising the proposed implementation timeline and suggesting extra safeguards beyond the ones already in the Basel II framework.
As we move forward, we continue to heed the findings from QIS4, especially those relating to the overall level of regulatory capital.
Capital serves as an important backstop against risk-taking and we need to ensure that an adequate level of capital is produced by the Basel II framework.
As I have said before, the Federal Reserve would not be comfortable qualifying any bank based on the results of QIS4, if Basel II were to be applied today.
The QIS4 results demonstrated that bank data and risk-management systems required by Basel II are not yet fully developed and implemented as expected by the framework.
To be sure, by the time that Basel II "goes live," bankers would have significantly more information regarding our expectations on model specifications and more robust default and loss-severity data.
Banks would also have to adhere to the qualification standards set by supervisors.
The road to Basel II will take several more additional steps, but we believe they are well worth the effort.
We will carefully review the comments to the ANPR on Basel I amendments, and then move to a notice of proposed rulemaking.
We plan to coordinate the NPRs for Basel I and Basel II so that bankers and others can evaluate each proposal, and compare the two proposals.
Thus, commenters should have full information when considering both proposals for changes to the capital framework for financial institutions in the United States.
HMDA Data The topic of fair lending, seen through the prism of the new Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data on mortgage loan pricing, is easily worth a speech in itself.
Today, I will only be able to touch on the topic.
However, you will be hearing more from the Federal Reserve about these data as we conduct further analysis.
The data contain a wealth of information, but in many respects they raise as many questions as they answer.
Remember that the new interest rate information provides supervisors with a screening tool to identify banks where additional testing needs to be conducted to determine if fair lending compliance is effective.
Some of the differences in pricing may reflect credit risk, and the HMDA data by itself does not include this information.
As you have seen in recent headlines, the data show that African-American and Hispanic borrowers obtain higher-priced mortgage loans much more frequently than do whites or Asian-Americans.
For example, African-American borrowers obtained higher-priced conventional home purchase loans in 2004 more than three-and-one-half times as often as white borrowers; Hispanics, more than twice as often as whites.1 Such great disparities raise legal issues of compliance with fair lending laws as well as basic ethical, social, and economic questions.
Attempting to answer those questions would be well beyond the scope of my remarks today.
I will simply emphasize that disparities of this kind challenge us to understand them better.
For only by understanding the disparities more deeply can we hope to discern their root causes and decide on appropriate responses.
An article by Federal Reserve staff in the Summer edition of the Federal Reserve Bulletin takes a step in the direction of deepening our understanding.
It notes that a major reason that African-Americans and Hispanics obtain higher-priced loans more frequently than whites is that they more frequently obtain loans from mortgage lenders that concentrate their business on originating higher-priced loans.
This partial explanation for the differences in the incidence of higher-priced borrowing, however, begs for its own explanation: Why is there a racial and ethnic difference in the tendency of borrowers to obtain loans from lenders that concentrate on higher-priced lending?
Qualitative and quantitative research on such questions will be critical to understanding racial and ethnic differences in lending outcomes.
Staff at the Federal Reserve will continue their research, and we hope and expect others will join them.
Research would benefit greatly from the input of banks and mortgage lenders such as yourselves.
The National Bankers Association, in particular, has provided valuable insight in the past into the structure and dynamics of mortgage lending markets with substantial minority populations, and into ways lenders could better serve those markets.

My remarks will focus on the near-term economic outlook of the United States in the immediate post-hurricane aftermath.
Then I will address the fiscal challenges that the country confronts.
As always, and perhaps even more so this time, I will be speaking for myself and not necessarily for my colleagues at the Federal Reserve.
In July, when I accepted your invitation to speak, I chose as my title "Update on the U.S.
Economy."
On the basis of how the U.S. economy was performing around midsummer, I anticipated that an October presentation on the economy would be quite positive.
At that time, the first-quarter increase in real GDP had been revised up to almost 4 percent, and after a slightly softer second quarter, most estimates pointed to another increase in the 4 percent range or higher for the third quarter.
The economy was generating, on average, 175,000 private nonfarm jobs per month, and the unemployment rate was down to 5 percent.
Core consumer price inflation was running at about 2 percent.
In short, at midyear, the U.S. economy appeared to be on firm footing, and inflation appeared to be well contained.
Canada's economy appeared to be in a roughly similar position, as inflation was running at about 2 percent--approximately the midpoint of the Bank of Canada's inflation-target band--and the unemployment rate at about 6-3/4 percent.
As always, the positive picture in the United States was not without potential risks, and the Chairman noted them in his midyear report to the Congress: Rising prices of energy and other commodities had put upward pressure on costs.
Labor costs had also picked up.
Already lofty housing prices that allowed homeowners to convert equity appreciation into consumption continued to rise and in some markets had reached levels that our Chairman had described as "frothy."
On balance, the FOMC continued to believe that policy accommodation could be removed at a measured pace.
However, the Committee noted that it would need to be alert to inflationary pressures and would respond to changes in economic prospects as required to fulfill its obligation to maintain price stability.
An additional benefit of the solid economic performance of the U.S. economy was that federal tax revenues were coming in faster than expected, an indication that the budget deficit for the fiscal year would be at its lowest level in the past three years.
However, despite the near-term positive fiscal news, no progress had been evidenced on addressing the longer-term fiscal issues involving the significant projected rise in spending for federal health and retirement programs.
In any event, I had expected that I would be going into the September FOMC meeting, and then speaking to you, with the U.S. economy on an upward trajectory.
But that expectation changed dramatically when Hurricanes Katrina and Rita came along.
Although the combined effect of the hurricanes was contained within a geographic area that accounted for just under 2 percent of the nation's population and roughly the same amount of the nation's production and income, the potential for spillover effects on the economy more broadly was difficult to assess.
The disruptive effect on oil refining, natural gas distribution, and chemical production; the damage to major ports and transportation infrastructure; and the significant devastation of a major city raised the risks of an effect on the economy that exceeded the direct effects on the areas battered by the storms.
To be sure, these disruptions also had adverse implications for costs and prices.
Further clouding the picture, the fiscal policy implications of funding the rebuilding and restoration had not yet been fully defined.
As our September FOMC meeting followed Hurricane Katrina by approximately three weeks and was held concurrently with the formation of Hurricane Rita, I felt that there was insufficient information as well as great uncertainty about how these forces would play out in the near term.
As a result, I voted to pause in the removal of policy accommodation until more was known.
What was clear then, and has become even more evident in the time since, is that the Gulf Coast of the United Sates suffered extraordinary human and economic losses.
The news reports have graphically displayed the tragic dislocations of millions of people, loss of life, and destruction of property.
As well, we have seen moving examples of the efforts directed toward the rescue of and care for the victims of the storms.
More recently, the massive cleanup operations have gained momentum, and it has been awesome to witness the determination of people beginning to rebuild their lives.
These forces--the destruction wrought by the hurricane and the reconstruction efforts--will be two of the key factors shaping economic activity in coming months.
A frustrating aspect of the situation is that even now, some six weeks after the first of the hurricanes made landfall, the incoming data are only beginning to shed some light on the economic ramifications of the storms.
Clearly, however, the destructive power of these hurricanes reduced economic activity by forcing the evacuation of millions of people from their places of work, destroying factories and offices, shuttering businesses, and closing schools and government offices.
The overall magnitude of many of these effects will be difficult for economic statisticians to measure.
In the industrial sector, however, a number of real-time indicators are available, and they show the effect in that sector to have been significant.
The Federal Reserve estimates that Hurricane Katrina reduced industrial production by 0.3 percent in August, even though it struck near the end of the month.
Oil and gas production and refining were particularly hard hit.
Hurricane Rita further damaged the Gulf Coast infrastructure and set back the pace of recovery.
In normal times, the Gulf produces 1-1/2 million barrels of crude oil per day--about 30 percent of the national total--and 10 billion cubic feet of natural gas per day--about 20 percent of the national total.
After Hurricane Rita struck, 100 percent of the oil production in the Gulf region was shut in for a time, as was 80 percent of the natural gas production.
Petroleum refining, chemical plants, and electricity distribution were also relatively hard hit by the hurricanes.
All told, industrial production was held down significantly in September as a result of lower output in these sectors.
That said, various daily and weekly data sources indicate that the industrial sector is beginning to recover in October as oil and gas production come back on line and repairs to factories and distribution advance.
The resilience and resourcefulness of the U.S. economy is illustrated by the reactions of firms and industries to the disruptions.
For example, the reduction in refining capacity in the Gulf has been partly replaced by higher operating rates in other areas, shifts in the composition of refined products, and an increased reliance on imports.
As a result, stock-outs and supply disruptions in the energy sector have not been widespread, at least thus far.
Industry sources suggest that much of the repair and recovery effort will likely be undertaken over the course of the next several months, and as that occurs, production rates should gradually return to normal.
Beyond the industrial sector, one indicator of economic activity more broadly is the behavior of employment.
Last week's employment report for September indicated that private nonfarm employment fell 66,000, compared with increases averaging around 175,000 per month over the preceding twelve months.
The shortfall of roughly 240,000 jobs from the earlier trend is a crude measure of the direct disruption effects of the hurricane.
More important, the apparent absence of significant indirect effects in other areas of the United States is an indication that the underlying gains in employment and income were well maintained outside the Gulf region.
An important question for policymakers is how inflation and economic activity will respond in coming months.
One concern is that the rise in energy prices, as well as the downshift in consumer confidence seen in recent readings, may hold back aggregate demand at least for a time.
However, the rebuilding itself should provide some impetus to demand in coming quarters.
At the same time, of course, higher prices for energy items, including gasoline, heating oil, and natural gas, will be adding to top-line inflation in the near term.
As well, these price increases will put upward pressure on the costs of the producers of other items, thereby posing the risk of some impetus to core inflation.
Whether these pressures are, in fact, passed through to core inflation will depend on a host of considerations, including the willingness of producers to absorb those cost increases and experience, at least for a time, lower profit margins.
Needless to say, developments in this area will be the subject of intense scrutiny on my part in coming months.
A vital contributor to the rebuilding and recovery effort will be the various actions of the federal government.
The magnitude of the devastation called for a significant response from the federal government, and the Congress and the President acted quickly to provide emergency spending and tax breaks to aid the areas affected by the hurricanes.
Whether these emergency fiscal measures will ultimately be financed by increased federal borrowing, or by finding offsetting spending decreases or revenue increases, is still an unsettled issue in the Congress.
To a certain extent, temporary emergency federal borrowing may be viewed as appropriate, as the costs would ultimately be spread out across all U.S. taxpayers over time.
Nonetheless, given the current size of the federal deficit, additional federal borrowing raises issues because of the potential negative effects that higher deficits can have on the economy.
Although expected outlays and tax breaks for hurricane disaster relief raise concerns about future deficits, budget developments over the past year had turned positive before the hurricanes for the first time in a while.
For the 2005 fiscal year that just closed at the end of last month, the U.S. federal government's budget deficit shrank, as federal tax revenues came in at a greater-than-expected pace.
Although the final accounting for the fiscal year is yet to be tallied, Treasury data indicate that the federal budget deficit was probably equal to about 2-1/2 percent of GDP--below its level of about 3-1/2 percent of GDP in the preceding two years.
That said, the budget figures for the fiscal year just ended were little affected by the fiscal policy response to the recent hurricanes.
Only a small portion of the emergency federal outlays budgeted for hurricane relief were actually spent in September, the last month of the fiscal year.
The bulk of the hurricane-related spending and tax relief will show up in the budget accounts in the current and next fiscal years.
Moreover, the total magnitude of the federal response is still unknown, adding to the uncertainty associated with the fiscal outlook.
Viewed from a longer-term perspective, the financial position of the U.S. federal budget has oscillated dramatically over the past ten years.
Ten years ago, the federal budget had a deficit that amounted to about 2-1/2 percent of GDP, roughly similar to the current percentage, and forecasts at that time pointed to some widening in this budget gap in future years.
Budget agreements in earlier years--1990 and 1993--had both raised taxes and reduced spending, and the combination of these actions had helped lower the federal budget deficits from the levels of previous years.
These budget agreements demonstrated the desire of policymakers to undertake some hard steps necessary to reduce the deficit.
They had also put in place caps on so-called discretionary federal spending--that is, the portion of federal spending that is allocated annually--and had required that legislative changes to taxes or entitlement spending be deficit neutral, a requirement called the PAYGO rule.
The PAYGO rule mandated that changes in taxes or entitlement spending be offset by other changes in taxes or entitlement spending so that the deficit was not increased.
Despite the enactment of deficit-reducing legislation and the existence of these budget rules, the best estimates ten years ago had the federal budget still running deficits far into the future.
However, as it turned out, a number of positive developments pushed the budget into surplus in 1998 through 2001.
Importantly, bipartisan support in the Congress for establishing and maintaining some measure of budget discipline was demonstrated by adherence to the guidelines set by the PAYGO rule and the discretionary spending caps.
In the 1990s, the discretionary spending caps appeared to be effective in limiting the rise in annual spending appropriations.
Defense spending declined by more than 2 percent of GDP, as the federal budget was able to claim a "peace dividend" after the breakup of the Soviet Union.
Furthermore, nondefense discretionary spending was held about constant as a share of GDP.
Discretionary spending was eventually allowed to exceed the spending caps but only after budget surpluses appeared in the late 1990s.
The PAYGO rule was also effective in the later half of the 1990s when legislative changes to taxes and entitlement spending were relatively small and were essentially neutral in their estimated effects on future budget balance.
The federal budget also benefited significantly from economic developments that occurred outside of policy actions.
In particular, federal tax revenues increased substantially more rapidly than expected and at a rate greater than the robust pace of economic growth seen in the late 1990s.
Also, the rate of growth of medical care costs slowed somewhat from its high previous rate, in part because of legislative changes.
Remarkable as it now seems, progress on the deficit was sufficiently dramatic that only five years ago serious policy discussions were undertaken concerning the possibility of effectively retiring all outstanding U.S. federal government debt.
Obviously, the federal budget did not continue to unfold in the manner projected at that time.
The rapid pace of ascent from deficit to surplus in the late 1990s was exceeded by the pace of descent back to deficits beginning in 2002.
This development was the result of a number of factors.
In 2001, tax cuts approximately the size of projected on-budget surpluses were passed.
Defense and homeland security spending increased in the wake of the attacks on September 11, 2001, and other nondefense domestic spending also increased at a substantially faster rate.
The budget rules put in place back in 1990 and extended several times thereafter--both the caps on discretionary spending and the PAYGO rule--were allowed to expire after 2002, though the commitment to these rules had waned considerably over the preceding years.
Besides these policy actions, spending for federal health programs also increased at faster rates as a result of a reacceleration in medical costs.
During this time, the economy experienced a mild recession, and the stock market declined for several years after its peak in 2000.
A review of federal government outlays--both on and off budget--and revenues since the early 1990s helps put the issue in perspective.
In the early 1990s, total federal outlays averaged about 22 percent of GDP, while revenues during that period were about 18 percent of GDP.
Annual deficits were the result.
By the late 1990s, outlays declined to under 19 percent of GDP, primarily as a result of significant reductions in defense spending relative to GDP, while revenues, boosted especially by a strong economy and a strong stock market, rose to a high of nearly 21 percent of GDP, thus yielding surpluses.
Canada experienced an even larger consolidation of its government budget during the 1990s.
More recently in the United States, total outlays have climbed back up to almost 20 percent of GDP, while revenue has dropped to about 17 percent of GDP and deficits have reemerged.
In contrast to the U.S. fiscal situation, Canada has maintained its budget surpluses in recent years.
Worrisome as these short-term fiscal issues are for the United States, they pale in comparison with the fiscal issues that are projected to begin emerging by the end of this decade.
In a few years, the U.S. baby-boom generation will start to retire.
Thus, the ratio of retirees to workers in the United States is expected to increase rapidly.
Indeed, this demographic phenomenon is confronting Canada and other major developed countries to an even greater degree than that expected in the United States.
Population aging will put substantial pressure on the U.S. federal government budget, as spending for federal government retirement and health programs will rise rapidly.
A more slowly growing workforce could also tend to damp economic growth and, thus, federal tax revenues.
So far, solutions to these long-term challenges have eluded policymakers.
It is imperative, however, that solutions be identified and implemented.
The sooner such changes are made, the less painful and disruptive they will be.
Of course, I do not want to minimize how difficult these problems will be to solve.
The Congressional Budget Office's long-run estimates for the United States indicate that demographic trends would boost federal spending by 5 percentage points of GDP by 2030, and even more thereafter, in the absence of changes to old-age programs.
The most important factor in ultimately achieving a federal government budget that balances over the business cycle and maintains that fiscal discipline over time is the will of the political system to make the necessary hard choices on government spending and taxes.
One possible means of expressing that will, would be for the Congress to reinstitute a set of budget rules, possibly along the lines of the discretionary spending caps and the PAYGO rule originally included in the 1990 budget act; these rules may assist in the process of making the difficult choices among competing budget priorities.
However, although the PAYGO budget rule, for example, appeared to help keep legislation from increasing federal deficits for a number of years, PAYGO did not provide a mechanism to deal with the long-term budget imbalances already in place.
Thus, it is worth considering whether future budget rules should go beyond the scope of PAYGO and require more fundamental adjustments to spending and taxes.
Clearly, there are numerous ways in which budget policy could be adjusted to bring the budget back into balance in the short run and to maintain it over the long run.
In any event, these difficult choices must ultimately be made.
If left unchecked, persistent and widening federal government deficits will have an increasingly corrosive effect on the U.S. economy because, all else being equal, federal government borrowing takes up some of the funds that would otherwise go to finance capital accumulation or to purchase capital assets from abroad.
A good deal of controversy has swirled around the question of whether increased federal borrowing reduces domestic investment, and presumably increases interest rates, or whether it increases U.S. borrowing from abroad.
Viewed from a broader perspective, however, that distinction is probably not very consequential because future national income is lower in either case.
For the federal government to run a deficit in the short run as a temporary response to an emergency event, such as the recent devastating hurricanes, or a recession or a war is not the type of fiscal policy imbalance that tends to have a negative long-run effect on an economy.
To the contrary, appropriate discretionary fiscal responses to these types of situations can have beneficial economic effects, as I suggested earlier in my remarks.
However, it is imperative that the nation come to grips with the fiscal implications of the retirement of the baby-boom generation.
Creating a budget strategy and implementing policy changes to balance the federal government's budget over the long term will require hard choices, which will become more difficult the longer they are delayed.

